Message Classification in the Call Center
Stephan Busemann, Sven Schmeier, Roman G. Arens
DFKI GmbH
Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3, D-66123 Saarbriicken, Germany
e-mail: {busemann, schmeier, arens}@dfki.de
Abstract
Customer care in technical domains is increasingly
based on e-mail communication, allowing for the re-production of approved solutions. Identifying the
customer's problem is often time-consuming, as the
problem space changes if new products are launched.
This paper describes a new approach to the classifi-cation of e-mail requests based on shallow text pro-cessing and machine learning techniques. It is im-plemented within an assistance system for call center
agents that is used in a commercial setting.
1 Introduction
Customer care in technical domains is increasingly
based on e-mail communication, allowing for the re-production of approved solutions. For a call cen-ter agent, identifying the customer's problem is of-ten time-consuming, as the problem space changes
if new products are launched or existing regulations
are modified. The typical task of a call center agent
processing e-mail requests consists of the following
steps:
Recognize the problem(s): read and understand
the e-mail request;
Search a solution: identify and select predefined
text blocks;
Provide the solution: if necessary, customize
text blocks to meet the current request, and
send the text.
This task can partly be automated by a system
suggesting relevant solutions for an incoming e-mail.
This would cover the first two steps. The last step
can be delicate, as its primary goal is to keep the
customer satisfied. Thus human intervention seems
mandatory to allow for individual, customized an-swers. Such a system will
• reduce the training effort required since agents
don't have to know every possible solution for
every possible problem;
. increase the agents' performance since agents
can more quickly select a solution among several
offered than searching one;
• improve the quality of responses since agents
will behave more homogeneously — both as a
group and over time — and commit fewer errors.
Given that free text about arbitrary topics must
be processed, in-depth approaches to language un-derstanding are not feasible. Given further that the
topics may change over time, a top-down approach
to knowledge modeling is out of the question. Rather
a combination of shallow text processing (STP) with
statistics-based machine learning techniques (SML)
is called for. STP gathers partial information about
text such as part of speech, word stems, negations,
or sentence type. These types of information can be
used to identify the linguistic properties of a large
training set of categorized e-mails. SML techniques
are used to build a classifier that is used for new,
incoming messages. Obviously, the change of topics
can be accommodated by adding new categories and
e-mails and producing a new classifier on the basis
of old and new data. We call this replacement of a
classifier &quot;relearning&quot;.
This paper describes a new approach to the clas-sification of e-mail requests along these lines. It is
implemented within the ICC-MAIL system, which
is an assistance system for call center agents that
is currently used in a commercial setting. Section 2
describes important properties of the input data, i.e.
the e-mail texts on the one hand, and the categories
on the other. These properties influenced the system
architecture, which is presented in Section 3. Vari-ous publicly available SML systems have been tested
with different methods of STP-based preprocessing.
Section 4 describes the results. The implementation
and usage of the system including the graphical user
interface is presented in Section 5. We conclude by
giving an outlook to further expected improvements
(Section 6).
2 Data Characteristics
A closer look at the data the ICC-MAIL system is
processing will clarify the task further. We carried
out experiments with unmodified e-mail data accu-mulated over a period of three months in the call
center database. The total amount was 4777 e-mails.
158
We used 47 categories, which contained at least 30
documents. This minimum amount of documents
turned out to render the category sufficiently dis-tinguishable for the SML tools. The database con-tained 74 categories with at least 10 documents, but
the selected ones covered 94% of all e-mails, i.e. 4490
documents.
It has not yet generally been investigated how the
type of data influences the learning result (Yang,
1999), or under which circumstances which kind of
preprocessing and which learning algorithm is most
appropriate. Several aspects must be considered:
Length of the documents, morphological and syn-tactic well-formedness, the degree to which a docu-ment can be uniquely classified, and, of course, the
language of the documents.
In our application domain the documents differ
very much from documents generally used in bench-mark tests, for example the Reuters corpus'. First
of all, we have to deal with German, whereas the
Reuters data are in English. The average length of
our e-mails is 60 words, whereas for documents of
Reuters-21578 it is 129 words. The number of cat-egories we used compares to the top 47 categories
of the Reuters TOPICS category set. While we
have 5008 documents, TOPICS consists of 13321 in-stances2. The Reuters documents usually are mor-phologically and syntactically well-formed. As e-mails are a more spontaneously created and infor-
mal type of document, they require us to cope with
a large amount of jargon, misspellings and gram-matical inaccuracy. A drastic example is shown in
Figure 2. The bad conformance to linguistic stan-dards was a major argument in favor of STP instead
of in-depth syntactic and semantic analysis.
The degree to which a document can be uniquely
classified is hard to verify and can only be inferred
from the results in general terms.3 It is, however,
dependent on the ability to uniquely distinguish the
classes. In our application we encounter overlapping
and non-exhaustive categories as the category sys-tem develops over time.
3 Integrating Language Technology
With Machine Learning
STP and SML correspond to two different
paradigms. STP tools used for classification tasks
promise very high recall/precision or accuracy val-ues. Usually human experts define one or several
template structures to be filled automatically by ex-tracting information from the documents (cf. e.g.
(Ciravegna et al., 1999)). Afterwards, the partially
lhttp://ww.research.att .comPaevis/reuters21578.
html
2We took only uniquely classified documents into account.
3Documents containing multiple requests can at present
only be treated manually, as described in Section 5.
filled templates are classified by hand-made rules.
The whole process brings about high costs in analyz-ing and modeling the application domain, especially
if it is to take into account the problem of changing
categories in the present application.
SML promises low costs both in analyzing and
modeling the application at the expense of a lower
accuracy. It is independent of the domain on the
one hand, but does not consider any domain specific
knowledge on the other.
By combining both methodologies in ICC-MAIL,
we achieve high accuracy and can still preserve a use-ful degree of domain-independence. STP may use
both general linguistic knowledge and linguistic al-gorithms or heuristics adapted to the application in
order to extract information from texts that is rele-vant for classification. The input to the SML tool is
enriched with that information. The tool builds one
or several categorizers4 that will classify new texts.
In general, SML tools work with a vector represen-tation of data. First, a relevancy vector of relevant
features for each class is computed (Yang and Ped-ersen, 1997). In our case the relevant features con-sist of the user-defined output of the linguistic pre-processor. Then each single document is translated
into a vector of numbers isomorphic to the defining
vector. Each entry represents the occurrence of the
corresponding feature. More details will be given in
Section 4
The ICC-MAIL architecture is shown in Figure 1.
The workflow of the system consists of a learning
step carried out off-line (the light gray box) and an
online categorization step (the dark gray box). In
the off-line part, categorizers are built by processing
classified data first by an STP and then by an SML
tool. In this way, categorizers can be replaced by the
system administrator as she wants to include new
or remove expired categories. The categorizers are
used on-line in order to classify new documents after
they have passed the linguistic preprocessing. The
resulting category is in our application associated
with a standard text that the call center agent uses
in her answer. The on-line step provides new clas-sified data that is stored in a dedicated ICC-MAIL
database (not shown in Figure 1). The relearning
step is based on data from this database.
3.1 Shallow Text Processing
Linguistic preprocessing of text documents is car-ried out by re-using smes, an information extrac-tion core system for real-world German text pro-cessing (Neumann et al., 1997). The fundamental
design criterion of smes is to provide a set of basic,
powerful, robust, and efficient STP components and
4Almost all tools we examined build a single multi-categorizer except for SVM_Light, which builds multiple bi-nary classifiers.
159
Figure 1: Architecture of the ICC-MAIL System.
(categorized
Data
generic linguistic knowledge sources that can eas-ily be customized to deal with different tasks in a
flexible manner. smes includes a text tokenizer, a
lexical processor and a chunk parser. The chunk
parser itself is subdivided into three components. In
the first step, phrasal fragments like general nominal
expressions and verb groups are recognized. Next,
the dependency-based structure of the fragments of
each sentence is computed using a set of specific sen-tence patterns. Third, the grammatical functions
are determined for each dependency-based structure
on the basis of a large subcategorization lexicon.
The present application benefits from the high mod-ularity of the usage of the components. Thus, it is
possible to run only a subset of the components and
to tailor their output. The experiments described in
Section 4 make use of this feature.
3.2 Statistics-Based Machine Learning
Several SML tools representing different learning
paradigms have been selected and evaluated in dif-ferent settings of our domain:
Lazy Learning: Lazy Learners are also known
as memory-based, instance-based, exemplar-based, case-based, experience-based, or
nearest neighbor neighbor algorithms. They store all
documents as vectors during the learning phase.
In the categorization phase, the new document
vector is compared to the stored ones and is
categorized to same class as the k-nearest neigh-bors. The distance is measured by computing
e.g. the Euclidean distance between the vectors.
By changing the number of neighbors k or the
kind of distance measure, the amount of gener-alization can be controlled.
We used IB (Aha, 1992), which is part of
the MLC++ library (Kohavi and Sommerfield,
1996).
Symbolic Eager Learning: This type of learners
constructs a representation for document vec-tors belonging to a certain class during the
learning phase, e.g. decision trees, decision rules
or probability weightings. During the catego-rization phase, the representation is used to as-sign the appropriate class to a new document
vector. Several pruning or specialization heuris-tics can be used to control the amount of gen-eralization.
We used ID3 (Quinlan, 1986), C4.5 (Quinlan,
1992) and C5.0, RIPPER (Cohen, 1995), and
the Naive Bayes inducer (Good, 1965) con-tained in the MLC++ library. ID3, C4.5 and
C5.0 produce decision trees, RIPPER is a rule-based learner and the Naive Bayes algorithm
computes conditional probabilities of the classes
from the instances.
Support Vector Machines (SVMs): SVMs are
described in (Vapnik, 1995). SVMs are binary
learners in that they distinguish positive and
negative examples for each class. Like eager
learners, they construct a representation dur-ing the learning phase, namely a hyper plane
supported by vectors of positive and negative
examples. For each class, a categorizer is built
by computing such a hyper plane. During the
categorization phase, each categorizer is applied
to the new document vector, yielding the prob-abilities of the document belonging to a class.
The probability increases with the distance of
thevector from the hyper plane. A document
is said to belong to the class with the highest
probability.
We chose SVM_Light (Joachims, 1998).
Neural Networks: Neural Networks are a special
kind of &quot;non-symbolic&quot; eager learning algo-
1 60
rithm. The neural network links the vector el-ements to the document categories The learn-ing phase defines thresholds for the activation
of neurons. In the categorization phase, a new
document vector leads to the activation of a sin-gle category. For details we refer to (Wiener et
al., 1995).
In our application, we tried out the Learning
Vector Quantization (LVQ) (Kohonen et al.,
1996). LVQ has been used in its default config-uration only. No adaptation to the application
domain has been made.
4 Experiments and Results
We describe the experiments and results we achieved
with different linguistic preprocessing and learning
algorithms and provide some interpretations.
We start out from the corpus of categorized e-mails described in Section 2. In order to normalize
the vectors representing the preprocessing results of
texts of different length, and to concentrate on rel-evant material (cf. (Yang and Pedersen, 1997)), we
define the relevancy vector as follows. First, all doc-uments are preprocessed, yielding a list of results
for each category. From each of these lists, the 100
most frequent results — according to a TF/IDF mea-sure — are selected. The relevancy vector consists of
all selected results, where doubles are eliminated.
Its length was about 2500 for the 47 categories; it
slightly varied with the kind of preprocessing used.
During the learning phase, each document is pre-processed. The result is mapped onto a vector of
the same length as the relevancy vector. For ev-ery position in the relevancy vector, it is determined
whether the corresponding result has been found. In
that case, the value of the result vector element is 1,
otherwise it is 0.
In the categorization phase, the new document is
preprocessed, and a result vector is built as described
above and handed over to the categorizer (cf. Fig-ure 1).
While we tried various kinds of linguistic prepro-cessing, systematic experiments have been carried
out with morphological analysis (MorphAna), shal-low parsing heuristics (STP-Heuristics), and a com-bination of both (Combined).
MorphAna: Morphological Analysis provided by
smes yields the word stems of nouns, verbs and
adjectives, as well as the full forms of unknown
words. We are using a lexicon of approx. 100000
word stems of German (Neumann et al., 1997).
STP-Heuristics: Shallow parsing techniques are
used to heuristically identify sentences contain-ing relevant information. The e-mails usually
contain questions and/or descriptions of prob-lems. The manual analysis of a sample of
the data suggested some linguistic constructions
frequently used to express the problem. We ex-pected that content words in these construc-tions should be particularly influential to the
categorization. Words in these constructions
are extracted and processed as in MorphAna,
and all other words are ignored.5 The heuris-tics were implemented in ICC-MAIL using smes.
The constructions of interest include negations
at the sentence and the phrasal level, yes-no
and wh-questions, and declaratives immediately
preceding questions. Negations were found to
describe a state to be changed or to refer to
missing objects, as in I cannot read my email
or There is no correct date. We identified them
through negation particles.6 Questions most of-ten refer to the problem in hand, either directly,
e.g. How can I start my email program? or in-directly, e.g. Why is this the case?. The lat-ter most likely refers to the preceding sentence,
e.g. My system drops my e-mails. Questions are
identified by their word order, i.e. yes-no ques-tions start with a verb and wh-questions with a
wh-particle.
Combined: In order to emphasize words found
relevant by the STP heuristics without losing
other information retrieved by MorphAna, the
previous two techniques are combined. Empha-sis is represented here by doubling the number
of occurrences of the tokens in the normaliza-tion phase, thus increasing their TF/IDF value.
Call center agents judge the performance of ICC-MAIL most easily in terms of accuracy: In what per-centage of cases does the classifier suggest the correct
text block? In Table 1, detailed information about
the accuracy achieved is presented. All experiments
were carried out using 10-fold cross-validation on the
data described in Section 2.
In all experiments the SVM_Light system outper-formed other learning algorithms, which confirms
Yang's (Yang and Liu, 1999) results for SVMs fed
with Reuters data. The k-nearest neighbor algo-rithm IB performed surprisingly badly although dif-ferent values of k were used. For IB, ID3, C4.5, C5.0,
Naive Bayes, RIPPER and SVM_Light, linguis-tic preprocessing increased the overall performance.
In fact, the method performing best, SVM_Light,
gained 3.5% by including the task-oriented heuris-tics. However, the boosted RIPPER and LVQ scored
a decreased accuracy value there. For LVQ the de-crease may be due to the fact that no adaptations to
6If no results were found this way, MorphAna was applied
instead.
6We certainly would have benefited from lexical semantic
information, e.g. The correct date is missing would not be
captured by our approach.
161
SML algorithm MorphAna Best5 STP-Heuristics - Combined Best5
Best Best Best5 Best
Neural Nets LVQ 35.66 22.29 25.97
Lazy Learner _IB 33.81 33.01 35.14
Symbolic Eager Naive Bayes 33.83 33.76 34.01
Learners ID3 38.53 38.11 40.02
RIPPER 47.08 49.38 50.54
Boosted Ripper 52.73 49.96 50.78
C4.5 52.00 52.90 53.40
_ C5.0 52.60 53.20 54.20
Support Vectors SVM_Light 53.85 74.91 54.84 78.05 56.23 78.17
Table 1: Results of Experiments. Most SML tools deliver the best result only. SVM_Light produces ranked
results, allowing to measure the accuracy of the top five alternatives (Best5).
the domain were made, such as adapting the number
of codebook vectors, the initial learning parameters
or the number of iterations during training (cf. (Ko-honen et al., 1996)). Neural networks are rather sen-sitive to misconfigurations. The boosting for RIP-PER seems to run into problems of overfitting. We
noted that in six trials the accuracy could be im-proved in Combined compared to MorphAna, but in
four trials, boosting led to deterioration. This effect
is also mentioned in (Quinlan, 1996).
These figures are slightly lower than the ones re-ported by (Neumann and Schmeier, 1999) that were
obtained from a different data set. Moreover, these
data did not contain multiple queries in one e-mail.
It would be desirable to provide explanations for
the behavior of the SML algorithms on our data. As
we have emphasized in Section 2, general methods
of explanation do not exist yet. In the application
in hand, we found it difficult to account for the ef-fects of e.g. ungrammatical text or redundant cate-gories. For the time being, we can only offer some
speculative and inconclusive assumptions: Some of
the tools performing badly - IB, ID3, and the Naive
Bayes inducer of the MLC++ library - have no or
little pruning ability. With rarely occurring data,
this leads to very low generalization rates, which
again is a problem of overfitting. This suggests that
a more canonical representation for the many ways
of expressing a technical problem should be sought
for. Would more extensive linguistic preprocessing
help?
Other tests not reported in Table 1 looked at im-provements through more general and sophisticated
STP such as chunk parsing. The results were very
discouraging, leading to a significant decrease com-pared to MorphAna. We explain this with the bad
compliance of e-mail texts to grammatical standards
(cf. the example in Figure 2).
However, the practical usefulness of chunk parsing
or even deeper language understanding such as se-mantic analysis may be questioned in general: In a
moving domain, the coverage of linguistic knowledge
will always be incomplete, as it would be too expen-sive for a call center to have language technology
experts keep pace with the occurrence of new top-ics. Thus the preprocessing results will often differ
for e-mails expressing the same problem and hence
not be useful for SML.
As a result of the tests in our application domain,
we identified a favorite statistical tool and found that
task-specific linguistic preprocessing is encouraging,
while general STP is not.
5 Implementation and Use
In this section we describe the integration of the
ICC-MAIL system into the workflow of the call cen-ter of AOL Bertelsmann Online GmbH & Co. KG,
which answers requests about the German version
of AOL software. A client/server solution was built
that allows the call center agents to connect as
clients to the ICC-MAIL server, which implements
the system described in Section 3. For this purpose,
it was necessary to
• connect the server module to AOL's own Sybase
database that delivers the incoming mail and
dispatches the outgoing answers, and to ICC-MAIL'S own database that stores the classified
e-mail texts;
• design the GUI of the client module in a self-explanatory and easy to use way (cf. Figure 2).
The agent reads in an e-mail and starts ICC-MAIL
using GUI buttons. She verifies the correctness of
the suggested answer, displaying and perhaps se-lecting alternative solutions. If the agent finds the
appropriate answer within these proposals, the asso-ciated text is filled in at the correct position of the
answer e-mail. If, on the other hand, no proposed
solution is found to be adequate, the ICC-MAIL tool
can still be used to manually select any text block
162
ci3. I CCmad-Klient
Menu Categorizer Tools Look&Feel New Items Favorites Own Items Local gems Select Items Found Help
_
Figure 2: The GUI of the ICC-MAIL Client. All labels and texts were translated by the authors. The English
input is based on the following original text, which is similarly awkward though understandable: Wie mache
ich zum mein Programrn total deinstalieren, und wieder neu instalierem, mit, wen Sie mir senden Version
4.0 ??????????????. The suggested answer text is associated with the category named &quot;Delete & Reinstall
AOL 4.0&quot;. Four alternative answers can be selected using the tabs. The left-hand side window displays the
active category in context.
Incoming Mail
rzi 1 1
eqn OPF
Ei Instalixtion
e-mol Problems
9 clAOL
D Deli% & Rsiostsll 4.0
172.1 CD, Sollwatt. HaNkNare
D FAO - cfml
1:1 IlenNebanking
D ISDN
Medtm
Error ebessages
How do I make to mine program totally deinstal, and again new
teinstal. with, who you send me version 4.0 ??.??????????7,??
Delete & Reinstall AOL 4.0
Before deinstalling the AOL-Software please check your folders for
-downloaded data
-saved passwords
and copy them into a backup folder.
Then remove the AOL-Software using the Windows Control Panel and
reinstall it from your CD.
After reinstallation please copy the data from the backup folder into
the right destinations.
from the database. The ICC-MAIL client had to pro-vide the functionality of the tool already in use since
an additional tool was not acceptable to the agents,
who are working under time pressure.
In the answer e-mail window, the original e-mail
is automatically added as a quote. If an e-mail con-tains several questions, the classification process can
be repeated by marking each question and iteratively
applying the process to the marked part. The agent
can edit the suggested texts before sending them off.
In each case, the classified text together with the se-lected category is stored in the ICC-MAIL database
for use in future learning steps.
Other features of the ICC-MAIL client module in-clude a spell checker and a history view. The latter
displays not only the previous e-mails of the same
author but also the solutions that have been pro-posed and the elapsed time before an answer was
sent.
The assumed average time for an agent to an-swer an e-mail is a bit more than two minutes with
AOL's own mail processing system.' With the ICC-MAIL system the complete cycle of fetching the mail,
checking the proposed solutions, choosing the ap-propriate solutions, inserting additional text frag-ments and sending the answer back can probably
be achieved in half the time. Systematic tests sup-
7This system does not include automatic analysis of mails.
porting this claim are not completed yet,8 but the
following preliminary results are encouraging:
• A test under real-time conditions at the call-
center envisaged the use of the ICC-MAIL sys-tem as a mail tool only, i.e. without taking ad-vantage of the system's intelligence. It showed
that the surface and the look-and-feel is ac-cepted and the functionality corresponds to the
real-time needs of the call center agents, as users
were slightly faster than within their usual en-vironment.
• A preliminary test of the throughput achieved
by using the STP and SML technology in ICC-MAIL showed that experienced users take about
50-70 seconds on average for one cycle, as de-scribed above. This figure was gained through
experiments with three users over a duration of
about one hour each.
Using the system with a constant set of categories
will improve its accuracy after repeating the off-line
learning step. If a new category is introduced, the
accuracy will slightly decline until 30 documents are
manually classified and the category is automatically
included into a new classifier. Relearning may take
place at regular intervals. The definition of new cat-egories must be fed into ICC-MAIL by a &quot;knowledge
8As of end of February 2000.
163
engineer&quot;, who maintains the system. The effects of
new categories and new data have not been tested
yet.
The optimum performance of ICC-MAIL can be
achieved only with a well-maintained category sys-tem. For a call center, this may be a difficult task
to achieve, espescially under severe time pressure,
but it will pay off. In particular, all new categories
should be added, outdated ones should be removed,
and redundant ones merged. Agents should only use
these categories and no others. The organizational
structure of the team should reflect this by defin-ing the tasks of the &quot;knowledge engineer&quot; and her
interactions with the agents.
6 Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented new combinations of STP and
SML methods to classify unrestricted e-mail text ac-cording to a changing set of categories. The current
accuracy of the ICC-MAIL system is 78% (correct so-lution among the top five proposals), corresponding
to an overall performance of 73% since ICC-MAIL
processes only 94% of the incoming e-mails. The
accuracy improves with usage, since each relearning
step will yield better classifiers. The accuracy is ex-pected to approximate that of the agents, but not
improve on it. With ICC-MAIL, the performance of
an experienced agent can approximately be doubled.
The system is currently undergoing extensive tests
at the call center of AOL Bertelsmann Online. De-tails about the development of the performance de-pending on the throughput and change of categories
are expected to be available by mid 2000.
Technically, we expect improvements from the fol-lowing areas of future work.
• Further task-specific heuristics aiming at gen-eral structural linguistic properties should be
defined. This includes heuristics for the identi-fication of multiple requests in a single e-mail
that could be based on key words and key
phrases as well as on the analysis of the doc-ument structure.
• Our initial experiments with the integration
of GermaNet (Hanap and Feldweg, 1997), the
evolving German version of WordNet, seem to
confirm the positive results described for Word-Net (de Buenaga Rodriguez et al., 1997) and
will thus be extended.
• A reorganization of the existing three-level cate-
gory system into a semantically consistent tree
structure would allow us to explore the non-terminal nodes of the tree for multi-layered
SML. This places additional requirements on
the knowledge engineering task and thus needs
to be thoroughly investigated for pay-off.
• Where system-generated answers are acceptable
to customers, a straightforward extension of
ICC-MAIL can provide this functionality. For
the application in hand, this was not the case.
The potential of the technology presented extends
beyond call center applications. We intend to ex-plore its use within an information broking assis-tant in document classification. In a further indus-trial project with German Telekom, the ICC-MAIL
technology will be extended to process multi-lingual
press releases. The nature of these documents will
allow us to explore the application of more sophis-ticated language technologies during linguistic pre-processing.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to our colleagues Gunter Neumann,
Matthias Fischmann, Volker Morbach, and Matthias
Rinck for fruitful discussions and for support with
smes modules. This work was partially supported by
a grant of the Minister of Economy and Commerce
of the Saarland, Germany, to the project ICC.
References
David W. Aha. 1992. Tolerating noisy, irrelevant
and novel attributes in instance based learning al-gorithms. International Journal of Man-Machine
Studies, 36(1), pages 267-287.
Fabio Ciravegna, Alberto Lavelli, Nadia Mana, Jo-hannes Matiasek, Luca Gilardoni, Silvia Mazza,
Massimo Ferraro, William J.Black, Fabio Ri-naldi, and David Mowatt. 1999. Facile: Classi-fying texts integrating pattern matching and in-formation extraction. In Proceedings of IJCAI'99,
Stockholm, pages 890-895.
William W. Cohen. 1995. Fast effective rule induc-tion. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International
Conference on Machine Learning, Lake Tahoe,
California.
Manuel de Buenaga Rodriguez, Jose Maria Gomez-Hidalgo, and Belen Diaz-Agudo. 1997. Using
WordNet to complement training information in
text categorization. In Proceedings of the Second
International Conference on Recent Advances in
Natural Language Processing, Montreal, Canada.
I.J. Good. 1965. The Estimation of Probabilities.
An Essay on Modern Bayesian Methods. MIT-Press.
Birgit Hamp and Helmut Feldweg. 1997. GermaNet
- a lexical-semantic net for German. In Proceed-ings of A CL workshop Automatic Information Ex-traction and Building of Lexical Semantic Re-sources for NLP Applications, Madrid, Spain
Thorsten Joachims. 1998. Text categorization with
support vector machines - learning with meany
relevant features. In Proceedings of the Euro-
164
pean Conference on Machine Learning (ECML),
Chemnitz, Germany, pages 137-142.
Ronny Kohavi and Dan Sommerfield, 1996.
MLC++ Machine Learning library in C++.
http://www.sgi.com/Technology/m1c.
Teuvo Kohonen, Jussi Hynninen, Jan Kangas,
Jorma Laaksonen, and Kari Torkkola. 1996.
LVQ-PAK the learning vector quantization pro-gram package. Technical Report A30, Helsinki
University of Technology.
Giinter Neumann, Rolf Backofen, Judith Baur,
Markus Becker, and Christian Braun. 1997. An
information extraction core system for real world
German text processing. In Proceedings of 5th
ANLP, Washington, pages 209-216.
Gunter Neumann and Sven Schmeier. 1999. Com-bining shallow text processing and macine learn-ing in real world applications. In Proceedings of
IJCAI workshop on Machine Learning for Infor-mation Filtering, Stockholm, pages 55-60.
J.R. Quinlan. 1986. Induction of Decision Trees.
Reprinted in Shavlik, Jude W. and Dietterich,
Thomas G, Readings in machine learning. Ma-chine learning series. Morgan Kaufmann (1990)
J.R. Quinlan. 1992. C4.5: Programs for Machine
Learning. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, Cali-fornia.
J.R. Quinlan. 1996. Bagging, Boosting and C4.5. In
Proceedings of A AA1'96, Portland, pages 725-730.
Vladimir N. Vapnik. 1995. The Nature of Statistical
Learning Theory. Springer.
E.D. Wiener, J. Pedersen, and A.S. Weigend. 1995.
A neural network approach to topic spotting. In
Proceedings of the SDAIR.
Y. Yang and Xin Liu. 1999. A re-examination of
text categorization methods. In Proceedings of
ACMSIGIR Conference on Research and Devel-opment in Information Retrieval, Berkley, Calfor-nia.
Y. Yang and J.P. Pedersen. 1997. A comparative
study on feature selection. In Proceedings of the
Fourteenth International Conference on Machine
Learning ( ICML '97).
Y. Yang. 1999. An evaluation of statistical ap-proaches to text categorization. Information Re-trieval Journal (May 1999).
165
Message Classification in the Call Center
Stephan Busemann
Sven Schmeier
Roman G Arens
GmbH
Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3, D-66123 Saarbriicken, Germany
arens}@dfki.de
Customer care in technical domains is increasingly based on e-mail communication, allowing for the reproduction of approved solutions. Identifying the customer's problem is often time-consuming, as the problem space changes if new products are launched. This paper describes a new approach to the classification of e-mail requests based on shallow text processing and machine learning techniques. It is implemented within an assistance system for call center agents that is used in a commercial setting.
David W Aha
Tolerating noisy, irrelevant and novel attributes in instance based learning algorithms.
1992
International Journal of Man-Machine Studies,
36
1
267--287
ur domain: Lazy Learning: Lazy Learners are also known as memory-based, instance-based, exemplarbased, case-based, experience-based, or nearest neighbor neighbor algorithms. They store all documents as vectors during the learning phase. In the categorization phase, the new document vector is compared to the stored ones and is categorized to same class as the k-nearest neighbors. The distance is measured by computing e.g. the Euclidean distance between the vectors. By changing the number of neighbors k or the kind of distance measure, the amount of generalization can be controlled. We used IB (Aha, 1992), which is part of the MLC++ library (Kohavi and Sommerfield, 1996). Symbolic Eager Learning: This type of learners constructs a representation for document vectors belonging to a certain class during the learning phase, e.g. decision trees, decision rules or probability weightings. During the categorization phase, the representation is used to assign the appropriate class to a new document vector. Several pruning or specialization heuristics can be used to control the amount of generalization. We used ID3 (Quinlan, 1986), C4.5 (Quinlan, 1992) and C5.0, RIPPER (Cohen, 1995), and the Naive Baye
Aha, 1992
David W. Aha. 1992. Tolerating noisy, irrelevant and novel attributes in instance based learning algorithms. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 36(1), pages 267-287.
Fabio Ciravegna
Alberto Lavelli
Nadia Mana
Johannes Matiasek
Luca Gilardoni
Silvia Mazza
Massimo Ferraro
William J Black
Fabio Rinaldi
David Mowatt
Facile: Classifying texts integrating pattern matching and information extraction.
1999
In Proceedings of IJCAI'99,
890--895
Stockholm,
an only be inferred from the results in general terms.3 It is, however, dependent on the ability to uniquely distinguish the classes. In our application we encounter overlapping and non-exhaustive categories as the category system develops over time. 3 Integrating Language Technology With Machine Learning STP and SML correspond to two different paradigms. STP tools used for classification tasks promise very high recall/precision or accuracy values. Usually human experts define one or several template structures to be filled automatically by extracting information from the documents (cf. e.g. (Ciravegna et al., 1999)). Afterwards, the partially lhttp://ww.research.att .comPaevis/reuters21578. html 2We took only uniquely classified documents into account. 3Documents containing multiple requests can at present only be treated manually, as described in Section 5. filled templates are classified by hand-made rules. The whole process brings about high costs in analyzing and modeling the application domain, especially if it is to take into account the problem of changing categories in the present application. SML promises low costs both in analyzing and modeling the application at the expense of a lower accurac
Ciravegna, Lavelli, Mana, Matiasek, Gilardoni, Mazza, Ferraro, Black, Rinaldi, Mowatt, 1999
Fabio Ciravegna, Alberto Lavelli, Nadia Mana, Johannes Matiasek, Luca Gilardoni, Silvia Mazza, Massimo Ferraro, William J.Black, Fabio Rinaldi, and David Mowatt. 1999. Facile: Classifying texts integrating pattern matching and information extraction. In Proceedings of IJCAI'99, Stockholm, pages 890-895.
William W Cohen
Fast effective rule induction.
1995
In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Machine Learning,
Lake Tahoe, California.
ntrolled. We used IB (Aha, 1992), which is part of the MLC++ library (Kohavi and Sommerfield, 1996). Symbolic Eager Learning: This type of learners constructs a representation for document vectors belonging to a certain class during the learning phase, e.g. decision trees, decision rules or probability weightings. During the categorization phase, the representation is used to assign the appropriate class to a new document vector. Several pruning or specialization heuristics can be used to control the amount of generalization. We used ID3 (Quinlan, 1986), C4.5 (Quinlan, 1992) and C5.0, RIPPER (Cohen, 1995), and the Naive Bayes inducer (Good, 1965) contained in the MLC++ library. ID3, C4.5 and C5.0 produce decision trees, RIPPER is a rulebased learner and the Naive Bayes algorithm computes conditional probabilities of the classes from the instances. Support Vector Machines (SVMs): SVMs are described in (Vapnik, 1995). SVMs are binary learners in that they distinguish positive and negative examples for each class. Like eager learners, they construct a representation during the learning phase, namely a hyper plane supported by vectors of positive and negative examples. For each class, a categorize
Cohen, 1995
William W. Cohen. 1995. Fast effective rule induction. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Machine Learning, Lake Tahoe, California.
Manuel de Buenaga Rodriguez
Jose Maria GomezHidalgo
Belen Diaz-Agudo
Using WordNet to complement training information in text categorization.
1997
In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing,
Montreal, Canada.
 to be available by mid 2000. Technically, we expect improvements from the following areas of future work. • Further task-specific heuristics aiming at general structural linguistic properties should be defined. This includes heuristics for the identification of multiple requests in a single e-mail that could be based on key words and key phrases as well as on the analysis of the document structure. • Our initial experiments with the integration of GermaNet (Hanap and Feldweg, 1997), the evolving German version of WordNet, seem to confirm the positive results described for WordNet (de Buenaga Rodriguez et al., 1997) and will thus be extended. • A reorganization of the existing three-level category system into a semantically consistent tree structure would allow us to explore the nonterminal nodes of the tree for multi-layered SML. This places additional requirements on the knowledge engineering task and thus needs to be thoroughly investigated for pay-off. • Where system-generated answers are acceptable to customers, a straightforward extension of ICC-MAIL can provide this functionality. For the application in hand, this was not the case. The potential of the technology presented extends beyond call cent
Rodriguez, GomezHidalgo, Diaz-Agudo, 1997
Manuel de Buenaga Rodriguez, Jose Maria GomezHidalgo, and Belen Diaz-Agudo. 1997. Using WordNet to complement training information in text categorization. In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing, Montreal, Canada.
I J Good
The Estimation of Probabilities. An Essay on Modern Bayesian Methods.
1965
MITPress.
part of the MLC++ library (Kohavi and Sommerfield, 1996). Symbolic Eager Learning: This type of learners constructs a representation for document vectors belonging to a certain class during the learning phase, e.g. decision trees, decision rules or probability weightings. During the categorization phase, the representation is used to assign the appropriate class to a new document vector. Several pruning or specialization heuristics can be used to control the amount of generalization. We used ID3 (Quinlan, 1986), C4.5 (Quinlan, 1992) and C5.0, RIPPER (Cohen, 1995), and the Naive Bayes inducer (Good, 1965) contained in the MLC++ library. ID3, C4.5 and C5.0 produce decision trees, RIPPER is a rulebased learner and the Naive Bayes algorithm computes conditional probabilities of the classes from the instances. Support Vector Machines (SVMs): SVMs are described in (Vapnik, 1995). SVMs are binary learners in that they distinguish positive and negative examples for each class. Like eager learners, they construct a representation during the learning phase, namely a hyper plane supported by vectors of positive and negative examples. For each class, a categorizer is built by computing such a hyper plane
Good, 1965
I.J. Good. 1965. The Estimation of Probabilities. An Essay on Modern Bayesian Methods. MITPress.
Birgit Hamp
Helmut Feldweg
GermaNet - a lexical-semantic net for German.
1997
In Proceedings of A CL workshop Automatic Information Extraction and Building of Lexical Semantic Resources for NLP Applications,
Madrid, Spain
Hamp, Feldweg, 1997
Birgit Hamp and Helmut Feldweg. 1997. GermaNet - a lexical-semantic net for German. In Proceedings of A CL workshop Automatic Information Extraction and Building of Lexical Semantic Resources for NLP Applications, Madrid, Spain
Thorsten Joachims
Text categorization with support vector machines - learning with meany relevant features.
1998
In Proceedings of the European Conference on Machine Learning (ECML),
137--142
Chemnitz, Germany,
ositive and negative examples for each class. Like eager learners, they construct a representation during the learning phase, namely a hyper plane supported by vectors of positive and negative examples. For each class, a categorizer is built by computing such a hyper plane. During the categorization phase, each categorizer is applied to the new document vector, yielding the probabilities of the document belonging to a class. The probability increases with the distance of thevector from the hyper plane. A document is said to belong to the class with the highest probability. We chose SVM_Light (Joachims, 1998). Neural Networks: Neural Networks are a special kind of &quot;non-symbolic&quot; eager learning algo1 60 rithm. The neural network links the vector elements to the document categories The learning phase defines thresholds for the activation of neurons. In the categorization phase, a new document vector leads to the activation of a single category. For details we refer to (Wiener et al., 1995). In our application, we tried out the Learning Vector Quantization (LVQ) (Kohonen et al., 1996). LVQ has been used in its default configuration only. No adaptation to the application domain has been made. 4 Experi
Joachims, 1998
Thorsten Joachims. 1998. Text categorization with support vector machines - learning with meany relevant features. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Machine Learning (ECML), Chemnitz, Germany, pages 137-142.
Ronny Kohavi
Dan Sommerfield
1996
MLC++ Machine Learning library in C++. http://www.sgi.com/Technology/m1c.
 known as memory-based, instance-based, exemplarbased, case-based, experience-based, or nearest neighbor neighbor algorithms. They store all documents as vectors during the learning phase. In the categorization phase, the new document vector is compared to the stored ones and is categorized to same class as the k-nearest neighbors. The distance is measured by computing e.g. the Euclidean distance between the vectors. By changing the number of neighbors k or the kind of distance measure, the amount of generalization can be controlled. We used IB (Aha, 1992), which is part of the MLC++ library (Kohavi and Sommerfield, 1996). Symbolic Eager Learning: This type of learners constructs a representation for document vectors belonging to a certain class during the learning phase, e.g. decision trees, decision rules or probability weightings. During the categorization phase, the representation is used to assign the appropriate class to a new document vector. Several pruning or specialization heuristics can be used to control the amount of generalization. We used ID3 (Quinlan, 1986), C4.5 (Quinlan, 1992) and C5.0, RIPPER (Cohen, 1995), and the Naive Bayes inducer (Good, 1965) contained in the MLC++ library. ID3, C4.5 an
Kohavi, Sommerfield, 1996
Ronny Kohavi and Dan Sommerfield, 1996. MLC++ Machine Learning library in C++. http://www.sgi.com/Technology/m1c.
Teuvo Kohonen
Jussi Hynninen
Jan Kangas
Jorma Laaksonen
Kari Torkkola
LVQ-PAK the learning vector quantization program package.
1996
Technical Report A30,
Helsinki University of Technology.
thevector from the hyper plane. A document is said to belong to the class with the highest probability. We chose SVM_Light (Joachims, 1998). Neural Networks: Neural Networks are a special kind of &quot;non-symbolic&quot; eager learning algo1 60 rithm. The neural network links the vector elements to the document categories The learning phase defines thresholds for the activation of neurons. In the categorization phase, a new document vector leads to the activation of a single category. For details we refer to (Wiener et al., 1995). In our application, we tried out the Learning Vector Quantization (LVQ) (Kohonen et al., 1996). LVQ has been used in its default configuration only. No adaptation to the application domain has been made. 4 Experiments and Results We describe the experiments and results we achieved with different linguistic preprocessing and learning algorithms and provide some interpretations. We start out from the corpus of categorized emails described in Section 2. In order to normalize the vectors representing the preprocessing results of texts of different length, and to concentrate on relevant material (cf. (Yang and Pedersen, 1997)), we define the relevancy vector as follows. First, all documents
 33.81 33.01 35.14 Symbolic Eager Naive Bayes 33.83 33.76 34.01 Learners ID3 38.53 38.11 40.02 RIPPER 47.08 49.38 50.54 Boosted Ripper 52.73 49.96 50.78 C4.5 52.00 52.90 53.40 _ C5.0 52.60 53.20 54.20 Support Vectors SVM_Light 53.85 74.91 54.84 78.05 56.23 78.17 Table 1: Results of Experiments. Most SML tools deliver the best result only. SVM_Light produces ranked results, allowing to measure the accuracy of the top five alternatives (Best5). the domain were made, such as adapting the number of codebook vectors, the initial learning parameters or the number of iterations during training (cf. (Kohonen et al., 1996)). Neural networks are rather sensitive to misconfigurations. The boosting for RIPPER seems to run into problems of overfitting. We noted that in six trials the accuracy could be improved in Combined compared to MorphAna, but in four trials, boosting led to deterioration. This effect is also mentioned in (Quinlan, 1996). These figures are slightly lower than the ones reported by (Neumann and Schmeier, 1999) that were obtained from a different data set. Moreover, these data did not contain multiple queries in one e-mail. It would be desirable to provide explanations for the behavior of the SML 
Kohonen, Hynninen, Kangas, Laaksonen, Torkkola, 1996
Teuvo Kohonen, Jussi Hynninen, Jan Kangas, Jorma Laaksonen, and Kari Torkkola. 1996. LVQ-PAK the learning vector quantization program package. Technical Report A30, Helsinki University of Technology.
Giinter Neumann
Rolf Backofen
Judith Baur
Markus Becker
Christian Braun
An information extraction core system for real world German text processing.
1997
In Proceedings of 5th ANLP,
209--216
Washington,
 categorizers are used on-line in order to classify new documents after they have passed the linguistic preprocessing. The resulting category is in our application associated with a standard text that the call center agent uses in her answer. The on-line step provides new classified data that is stored in a dedicated ICC-MAIL database (not shown in Figure 1). The relearning step is based on data from this database. 3.1 Shallow Text Processing Linguistic preprocessing of text documents is carried out by re-using smes, an information extraction core system for real-world German text processing (Neumann et al., 1997). The fundamental design criterion of smes is to provide a set of basic, powerful, robust, and efficient STP components and 4Almost all tools we examined build a single multicategorizer except for SVM_Light, which builds multiple binary classifiers. 159 Figure 1: Architecture of the ICC-MAIL System. (categorized Data generic linguistic knowledge sources that can easily be customized to deal with different tasks in a flexible manner. smes includes a text tokenizer, a lexical processor and a chunk parser. The chunk parser itself is subdivided into three components. In the first step, phrasal fra
 In the categorization phase, the new document is preprocessed, and a result vector is built as described above and handed over to the categorizer (cf. Figure 1). While we tried various kinds of linguistic preprocessing, systematic experiments have been carried out with morphological analysis (MorphAna), shallow parsing heuristics (STP-Heuristics), and a combination of both (Combined). MorphAna: Morphological Analysis provided by smes yields the word stems of nouns, verbs and adjectives, as well as the full forms of unknown words. We are using a lexicon of approx. 100000 word stems of German (Neumann et al., 1997). STP-Heuristics: Shallow parsing techniques are used to heuristically identify sentences containing relevant information. The e-mails usually contain questions and/or descriptions of problems. The manual analysis of a sample of the data suggested some linguistic constructions frequently used to express the problem. We expected that content words in these constructions should be particularly influential to the categorization. Words in these constructions are extracted and processed as in MorphAna, and all other words are ignored.5 The heuristics were implemented in ICC-MAIL using smes. The con
Neumann, Backofen, Baur, Becker, Braun, 1997
Giinter Neumann, Rolf Backofen, Judith Baur, Markus Becker, and Christian Braun. 1997. An information extraction core system for real world German text processing. In Proceedings of 5th ANLP, Washington, pages 209-216.
Gunter Neumann
Sven Schmeier
Combining shallow text processing and macine learning in real world applications.
1999
In Proceedings of IJCAI workshop on Machine Learning for Information Filtering,
55--60
Stockholm,
racy of the top five alternatives (Best5). the domain were made, such as adapting the number of codebook vectors, the initial learning parameters or the number of iterations during training (cf. (Kohonen et al., 1996)). Neural networks are rather sensitive to misconfigurations. The boosting for RIPPER seems to run into problems of overfitting. We noted that in six trials the accuracy could be improved in Combined compared to MorphAna, but in four trials, boosting led to deterioration. This effect is also mentioned in (Quinlan, 1996). These figures are slightly lower than the ones reported by (Neumann and Schmeier, 1999) that were obtained from a different data set. Moreover, these data did not contain multiple queries in one e-mail. It would be desirable to provide explanations for the behavior of the SML algorithms on our data. As we have emphasized in Section 2, general methods of explanation do not exist yet. In the application in hand, we found it difficult to account for the effects of e.g. ungrammatical text or redundant categories. For the time being, we can only offer some speculative and inconclusive assumptions: Some of the tools performing badly - IB, ID3, and the Naive Bayes inducer of the MLC++ 
Neumann, Schmeier, 1999
Gunter Neumann and Sven Schmeier. 1999. Combining shallow text processing and macine learning in real world applications. In Proceedings of IJCAI workshop on Machine Learning for Information Filtering, Stockholm, pages 55-60.
J R Quinlan
Induction of Decision Trees.
1986
Readings in machine learning. Machine learning series.
Morgan Kaufmann
Reprinted in
istance measure, the amount of generalization can be controlled. We used IB (Aha, 1992), which is part of the MLC++ library (Kohavi and Sommerfield, 1996). Symbolic Eager Learning: This type of learners constructs a representation for document vectors belonging to a certain class during the learning phase, e.g. decision trees, decision rules or probability weightings. During the categorization phase, the representation is used to assign the appropriate class to a new document vector. Several pruning or specialization heuristics can be used to control the amount of generalization. We used ID3 (Quinlan, 1986), C4.5 (Quinlan, 1992) and C5.0, RIPPER (Cohen, 1995), and the Naive Bayes inducer (Good, 1965) contained in the MLC++ library. ID3, C4.5 and C5.0 produce decision trees, RIPPER is a rulebased learner and the Naive Bayes algorithm computes conditional probabilities of the classes from the instances. Support Vector Machines (SVMs): SVMs are described in (Vapnik, 1995). SVMs are binary learners in that they distinguish positive and negative examples for each class. Like eager learners, they construct a representation during the learning phase, namely a hyper plane supported by vectors of positiv
Quinlan, 1986
J.R. Quinlan. 1986. Induction of Decision Trees. Reprinted in Shavlik, Jude W. and Dietterich, Thomas G, Readings in machine learning. Machine learning series. Morgan Kaufmann (1990)
J R Quinlan
C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning.
1992
Morgan Kaufmann,
San Mateo, California.
mount of generalization can be controlled. We used IB (Aha, 1992), which is part of the MLC++ library (Kohavi and Sommerfield, 1996). Symbolic Eager Learning: This type of learners constructs a representation for document vectors belonging to a certain class during the learning phase, e.g. decision trees, decision rules or probability weightings. During the categorization phase, the representation is used to assign the appropriate class to a new document vector. Several pruning or specialization heuristics can be used to control the amount of generalization. We used ID3 (Quinlan, 1986), C4.5 (Quinlan, 1992) and C5.0, RIPPER (Cohen, 1995), and the Naive Bayes inducer (Good, 1965) contained in the MLC++ library. ID3, C4.5 and C5.0 produce decision trees, RIPPER is a rulebased learner and the Naive Bayes algorithm computes conditional probabilities of the classes from the instances. Support Vector Machines (SVMs): SVMs are described in (Vapnik, 1995). SVMs are binary learners in that they distinguish positive and negative examples for each class. Like eager learners, they construct a representation during the learning phase, namely a hyper plane supported by vectors of positive and negative example
Quinlan, 1992
J.R. Quinlan. 1992. C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, California.
J R Quinlan
Bagging, Boosting and C4.5.
1996
In Proceedings of A AA1'96,
725--730
Portland,
result only. SVM_Light produces ranked results, allowing to measure the accuracy of the top five alternatives (Best5). the domain were made, such as adapting the number of codebook vectors, the initial learning parameters or the number of iterations during training (cf. (Kohonen et al., 1996)). Neural networks are rather sensitive to misconfigurations. The boosting for RIPPER seems to run into problems of overfitting. We noted that in six trials the accuracy could be improved in Combined compared to MorphAna, but in four trials, boosting led to deterioration. This effect is also mentioned in (Quinlan, 1996). These figures are slightly lower than the ones reported by (Neumann and Schmeier, 1999) that were obtained from a different data set. Moreover, these data did not contain multiple queries in one e-mail. It would be desirable to provide explanations for the behavior of the SML algorithms on our data. As we have emphasized in Section 2, general methods of explanation do not exist yet. In the application in hand, we found it difficult to account for the effects of e.g. ungrammatical text or redundant categories. For the time being, we can only offer some speculative and inconclusive assumptions
Quinlan, 1996
J.R. Quinlan. 1996. Bagging, Boosting and C4.5. In Proceedings of A AA1'96, Portland, pages 725-730.
Vladimir N Vapnik
The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory.
1995
Springer.
 During the categorization phase, the representation is used to assign the appropriate class to a new document vector. Several pruning or specialization heuristics can be used to control the amount of generalization. We used ID3 (Quinlan, 1986), C4.5 (Quinlan, 1992) and C5.0, RIPPER (Cohen, 1995), and the Naive Bayes inducer (Good, 1965) contained in the MLC++ library. ID3, C4.5 and C5.0 produce decision trees, RIPPER is a rulebased learner and the Naive Bayes algorithm computes conditional probabilities of the classes from the instances. Support Vector Machines (SVMs): SVMs are described in (Vapnik, 1995). SVMs are binary learners in that they distinguish positive and negative examples for each class. Like eager learners, they construct a representation during the learning phase, namely a hyper plane supported by vectors of positive and negative examples. For each class, a categorizer is built by computing such a hyper plane. During the categorization phase, each categorizer is applied to the new document vector, yielding the probabilities of the document belonging to a class. The probability increases with the distance of thevector from the hyper plane. A document is said to belong to the cla
Vapnik, 1995
Vladimir N. Vapnik. 1995. The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory. Springer.
E D Wiener
J Pedersen
A S Weigend
A neural network approach to topic spotting.
1995
In Proceedings of the SDAIR.
abilities of the document belonging to a class. The probability increases with the distance of thevector from the hyper plane. A document is said to belong to the class with the highest probability. We chose SVM_Light (Joachims, 1998). Neural Networks: Neural Networks are a special kind of &quot;non-symbolic&quot; eager learning algo1 60 rithm. The neural network links the vector elements to the document categories The learning phase defines thresholds for the activation of neurons. In the categorization phase, a new document vector leads to the activation of a single category. For details we refer to (Wiener et al., 1995). In our application, we tried out the Learning Vector Quantization (LVQ) (Kohonen et al., 1996). LVQ has been used in its default configuration only. No adaptation to the application domain has been made. 4 Experiments and Results We describe the experiments and results we achieved with different linguistic preprocessing and learning algorithms and provide some interpretations. We start out from the corpus of categorized emails described in Section 2. In order to normalize the vectors representing the preprocessing results of texts of different length, and to concentrate on relevant material 
Wiener, Pedersen, Weigend, 1995
E.D. Wiener, J. Pedersen, and A.S. Weigend. 1995. A neural network approach to topic spotting. In Proceedings of the SDAIR.
Y Yang
Xin Liu
A re-examination of text categorization methods.
1999
In Proceedings of ACMSIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
Berkley, Calfornia.
 combined. Emphasis is represented here by doubling the number of occurrences of the tokens in the normalization phase, thus increasing their TF/IDF value. Call center agents judge the performance of ICCMAIL most easily in terms of accuracy: In what percentage of cases does the classifier suggest the correct text block? In Table 1, detailed information about the accuracy achieved is presented. All experiments were carried out using 10-fold cross-validation on the data described in Section 2. In all experiments the SVM_Light system outperformed other learning algorithms, which confirms Yang's (Yang and Liu, 1999) results for SVMs fed with Reuters data. The k-nearest neighbor algorithm IB performed surprisingly badly although different values of k were used. For IB, ID3, C4.5, C5.0, Naive Bayes, RIPPER and SVM_Light, linguistic preprocessing increased the overall performance. In fact, the method performing best, SVM_Light, gained 3.5% by including the task-oriented heuristics. However, the boosted RIPPER and LVQ scored a decreased accuracy value there. For LVQ the decrease may be due to the fact that no adaptations to 6If no results were found this way, MorphAna was applied instead. 6We certainly would
Yang, Liu, 1999
Y. Yang and Xin Liu. 1999. A re-examination of text categorization methods. In Proceedings of ACMSIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, Berkley, Calfornia.
Y Yang
J P Pedersen
A comparative study on feature selection.
1997
In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Machine Learning ( ICML '97).
 combining both methodologies in ICC-MAIL, we achieve high accuracy and can still preserve a useful degree of domain-independence. STP may use both general linguistic knowledge and linguistic algorithms or heuristics adapted to the application in order to extract information from texts that is relevant for classification. The input to the SML tool is enriched with that information. The tool builds one or several categorizers4 that will classify new texts. In general, SML tools work with a vector representation of data. First, a relevancy vector of relevant features for each class is computed (Yang and Pedersen, 1997). In our case the relevant features consist of the user-defined output of the linguistic preprocessor. Then each single document is translated into a vector of numbers isomorphic to the defining vector. Each entry represents the occurrence of the corresponding feature. More details will be given in Section 4 The ICC-MAIL architecture is shown in Figure 1. The workflow of the system consists of a learning step carried out off-line (the light gray box) and an online categorization step (the dark gray box). In the off-line part, categorizers are built by processing classified data first by an STP
ur application, we tried out the Learning Vector Quantization (LVQ) (Kohonen et al., 1996). LVQ has been used in its default configuration only. No adaptation to the application domain has been made. 4 Experiments and Results We describe the experiments and results we achieved with different linguistic preprocessing and learning algorithms and provide some interpretations. We start out from the corpus of categorized emails described in Section 2. In order to normalize the vectors representing the preprocessing results of texts of different length, and to concentrate on relevant material (cf. (Yang and Pedersen, 1997)), we define the relevancy vector as follows. First, all documents are preprocessed, yielding a list of results for each category. From each of these lists, the 100 most frequent results — according to a TF/IDF measure — are selected. The relevancy vector consists of all selected results, where doubles are eliminated. Its length was about 2500 for the 47 categories; it slightly varied with the kind of preprocessing used. During the learning phase, each document is preprocessed. The result is mapped onto a vector of the same length as the relevancy vector. For every position in the relevancy ve
Yang, Pedersen, 1997
Y. Yang and J.P. Pedersen. 1997. A comparative study on feature selection. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Machine Learning ( ICML '97).
Y Yang
An evaluation of statistical approaches to text categorization.
1999
Information Retrieval Journal
clarify the task further. We carried out experiments with unmodified e-mail data accumulated over a period of three months in the call center database. The total amount was 4777 e-mails. 158 We used 47 categories, which contained at least 30 documents. This minimum amount of documents turned out to render the category sufficiently distinguishable for the SML tools. The database contained 74 categories with at least 10 documents, but the selected ones covered 94% of all e-mails, i.e. 4490 documents. It has not yet generally been investigated how the type of data influences the learning result (Yang, 1999), or under which circumstances which kind of preprocessing and which learning algorithm is most appropriate. Several aspects must be considered: Length of the documents, morphological and syntactic well-formedness, the degree to which a document can be uniquely classified, and, of course, the language of the documents. In our application domain the documents differ very much from documents generally used in benchmark tests, for example the Reuters corpus'. First of all, we have to deal with German, whereas the Reuters data are in English. The average length of our e-mails is 60 words, whereas 
Yang, 1999
Y. Yang. 1999. An evaluation of statistical approaches to text categorization. Information Retrieval Journal (May 1999).
