Online Support Groups for Depression in China:
Culturally Shaped Interactions and Motivations
Renwen Zhang , Jordan Eschler & Madhu Reddy
Department of Communication Studies, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL , USA (E-mail:
alicezhang@u.northwestern.edu)
Abstract. Online support groups have drawn considerable attention from scholars in the past decades.
While prior research has explored the interactions and motivations of users, we know relatively little
about how culture shapes the way people use and understand online support groups. Drawing on
ethnographic research in a Chinese online depression community, we examine how online support
groups function in the context of Chinese culture for people with depression. Through online observations
and interviews, we uncover the unique interactions among users in this online support group, such
as peer diagnosis, peer therapy, and public journaling. These activities were intertwined with Chinese
cultural values and the scarcity of mental health resources in China. We also show that online support
groups play an important role in fostering individual empowerment and improving public understanding
of depression in China. This paper provides insights into the interweaving of culture and online health
community use and contributes to a context-rich understanding of online support groups.
Keywords: Mental health, Depression, Online support groups, Cultu
verbal cues of online communication, people perceive that there is less risk in
disclosing their stigmatized issues to others and thus tend to be more open online
(Bargh et al. 2002; Tidwell and Walther 2002). Open online discussions often result
in increased knowledge, better decisions, augmented social support, and a sense of
control (Barak et al. 2008; Bartlett and Coulson 2011). These positive consequences
can generate individual empowerment which is key to improving health outcomes
(Corrigan and Rao 2012).
Computer support cooperative work (CSCW) scholars have long been interested
in online support groups. Prior work has focused on users’ needs, types of
self-disclosure, social support exchanges among users (Andalibi et al. 2017; De
Choudhury and De 2014; Eschler and Pratt 2017; Wang et al. 2012). Despite a
large body of literature on online support groups, the socio-cultural aspects of
group engagement have been largely overlooked. Studies have shown that
individuals’ use of online support groups is contingent on social and cultural
contexts (Li et al. 2016). In particular, Chinese cultural values and health
beliefs significantly affect people’s understanding of depression, illness management,
and social interactions (Li et al. 2016). These cultural values may also
influence how and why people participate in online support groups and affect
how they benefit from the engagement.
In this paper, we present a study about an online support group for depression in
China. Based on online observations and semi-structured interviews, we examine the
interactions among users in the group, as well as their motivations for use and
benefits they receive from the engagement. Specifically, we focus on the unique
aspects of Chinese culture that impact the use of online support groups. We also
examine how online support groups are integrated into users’ depression management
practices and at the same time create new possibilities for individual empowerment
and destigmatization.
This paper contributes to the existing body of literature in three ways. First,
we describe the social interactions in a Chinese online support group that do not
neatly fit previous observations of online health communities in the West. By
examining the Chinese social and cultural contexts that shape the user engagement,
we contribute to a context-rich understanding of online support groups.
Second, we draw attention to the empowering effect of online support groups in
places where mental health resources are scarce. This augments existing literature
about patient empowerment and online health community engagement.
Third, we discuss the potential for online support groups to improve public
understanding of depression and reduce stigma at a societal level, which sheds
light on the social implications of online health communities.
In the sections that follow, we first present a literature review of prior work on
mental illness in China, mental illness stigma, and online support groups, followed
by a detailed account of our research methods. We then report our findings from the
observations of the online support group and the interviews with its users. We
particularly focus on users’social interactions, motivations, and benefits in engaging
Zhang Renwen et al.
in the online support group. Finally, we discuss how the findings of this study
provide new insights into our understanding of online support groups.
2. Related Work
2.1. Mental Illness in China
China has experienced remarkable economic rise over the past decades. However,
despite the rapid transformation, China’s mental health care lags far behind other
countries. In 2014, China had roughly 23,000 psychiatrists – 1.7 for every 100,000
people, compared to the US with 12 for every 100,000 people (Organization 2017).
Among these psychiatrists, only about 4000 are fully qualified (Xiang et al. 2012).
Moreover, mental health care resources in China are concentrated in cities, whereas
half of the country’s 1.4 billion people live in rural areas (Xiang et al. 2012). The
scarce and uneven distribution of mental health services has resulted in a lack of
treatment for people with mental illness in China. It is estimated that over 90% of
Chinese people with depression have never received treatment (Phillips et al. 2009).
This lack of treatment is compounded by an overall lack of knowledge and
awareness of mental illness in China (Li et al. 2016). Depression has long been
diagnosed as neurasthenia (shenjing shuairuo, a mechanical weakness of the nerves),
rather than a mental health diagnosis, resulting in a low reported prevalence of
depression over the past decades (Kleinman 1986; Love 2017). Neurasthenia is often
treated with traditional Chinese medicine such as herbs and acupuncture (Kleinman
1986). In addition, long-standing Confucian ideologies prompt Chinese people to
neglect or hide their inner emotions and feelings, but be more sensitive to somatic
symptoms such as fatigue, insomnia, headache, and muscle pain (Li et al. 2016).
Therefore, Chinese people with depression often emphasize somatic symptoms as
opposed to Western patients who stress emotional and psychological symptoms
(Kleinman 1986; Parker et al. 2001; Ryder et al. 2008). Even today, many Chinese
still do not consider depression an illness. The lack of knowledge and awareness of
depression perpetuates the low rate of treatment in China.
Chinese people with mental illness often experience intense stigma, partly due to
Chinese traditional values and the social norms of ‘face’ (mianzi) (Yang and Kleinman
2008). Confucianism values self-control and the ability to solve inner conflicts (Li
et al. 2016). Chinese society tends to consider depression an excuse for failure and for
an unwillingness to work hard. People with depression, therefore, are viewed as being
weak (Li et al. 2016). Because the behavior of the individual often reflects on the
family in Chinese collectivist culture, stigmatized illnesses such as depression are
regarded as threatening the ‘face’ of one’s family. Moreover, traditional Chinese
beliefs suggest mental illness is a punishment for the misconduct of one’s ancestors
and, therefore, family members of the depressed may also find themselves stigmatized
(Yang 2007). Consequently, having a mental illness becomes a shame or guilt that
threatens the ‘face’ (i.e. dignity) of one’s family and clan (Yang 2007). This often
compels Chinese people to conceal their depression to save face for their family.
Online Support Groups for Depression in China: Culturally...
People with mental illness are stereotyped as insane and unpredictable with the
potential to cause danger to others and to society (Rüsch et al. 2005). Some mental
hospitals in China treat their patients as prisoners, locked behind metal doors and
strapped to beds (Economist 2017). Mental hospitals are also sometimes used to
detain political dissidents who do not have mental health problems (Economist
2017). For these reasons, it is unsurprising that the Chinese have significantly greater
negative stereotypes towards people with mental illness compared to their Western
counterparts (Knifton et al. 2010; Yang 2007; Yang et al. 2010). These stereotypes
stem from the stigma attached to mental illness, which can be as disabling as the
illness itself. In the following section, we will take a closer look at stigma and
strategies to manage stigma.
2.2. Mental Illness Stigma and Stigma Management
The stigma of mental illness does not only exist in China. Goffman defines stigma as
a mark of disgrace associated with any physical, social, or personal attribute that is
deeply discrediting (Goffman 1963). Stigmatized individuals are subject to prejudice
and discrimination which diminishes their life chances (Goffman 1963). Stigma
undermines an individual’s dignity and self-esteem, leading to decreased wellbeing
and quality of life (Corrigan and Watson 2002; Link et al. 1997). The desire
to conceal stigmatized conditions often prevents individuals from seeking treatment
(Link et al. 1997). Stigma also limits individuals’ access to material, social, and
cultural resources, contributing to health disparities (Hatzenbuehler et al. 2013).
In making sense of the prejudice and discrimination experienced by people with
mental illness, researchers have made a distinction between public stigma and selfstigma
(Corrigan and Rao 2012; Rüsch et al. 2005). Public stigma refers to the
negative attitudes held by the general public towards a stigmatized group, while selfstigma
occurs when individuals internalize these stigmatizing attitudes and suffer
negative consequences (Corrigan and Watson 2002; Rüsch et al. 2005). Public
stigma often results in restricted opportunities of stigmatized groups (Link et al.
1997), and self-stigma engenders diminished self-esteem and self-efficacy, leading to
isolation and poor health outcomes (Corrigan and Rao 2012).
Stigmatization has also been conceptualized as a socio-cultural process which
operates to reproduce structural power relationships that exclude stigmatized individuals
from the social world (Farrugia 2009; Parker and Aggleton 2003). People
with mental illness are positioned as less powerful and thus subject to discriminatory
consequences. As Parker and Aggleton (2003), ‘stigma and stigmatization function,
quite literally, at the point of intersection between culture, power and difference’
(p.17). The construction and experience of stigma are constituted differently across
social contexts and can shift over time (Toyoki and Brown 2014).
Individuals employ a variety of strategies to manage their stigmatized identities
in ongoing social situations (Goffman 1963; Toyoki and Brown 2014).
For example, stigmatized individuals strategically manage their identity through
Zhang Renwen et al.
‘techniques of information control’ (Goffman 1963). They tend to share little
with outsiders, but everything with insiders, such as others with similar conditions
(Goffman 1963). This can help them cope with the negative consequences
of self-stigma (Corrigan and Rao 2012). Furthermore, group identification has
been shown to diminish the effects of self-stigma on people with mental illness
(Jetten et al. 2001). For example, individuals who belong to a group of people
with mental illness are less likely to agree with the stereotypes and, consequently,
less likely to experience decreased self-esteem and self-efficacy
(Watson et al. 2007). Individuals may develop positive self-perceptions via
their interactions with peers from the stigmatized group (Watson et al. 2007).
2.3. Online Support Groups for Mental Health
Given the pivotal role of group identification in combating stigma, online support
groups have opened up new possibilities for people with mental illness (Barak et al.
2008). Because of the anonymity and reduced non-verbal cues in online communication,
the barriers to and risks of disclosing one’s stigmatized illness are greatly
reduced (Walther 1996). Individuals are less likely to face judgment or rejection from
others in online settings than those in the offline world (Walther 1996). Thus,
individuals with mental illness often feel comfortable opening up online (Berger
et al. 2005). Increased self-disclosure helps individuals to forge relationships that
might not be possible offline, leading to increased social support and reduced feelings
of isolation (Barak et al. 2008; Berger et al. 2005).
Studies have found empowerment to be the most salient benefit of support group
attendance (Barak et al. 2008; Bartlett and Coulson 2011; Ussher et al. 2006).
Empowerment refers to the individual ability to make personal decisions, to access
relevant resources, and to experiencing personal growth as a results of developing
skills and abilities (Staples 1990; Wallerstein 1992). Engagement in online support
groups empowers patients through exchanging information, sharing experiences, and
providing emotional support (van Uden-Kraan et al. 2008). Online discussions with
peers not only help users make better treatment decisions (Barak et al. 2008), but also
improve acceptance of the disease and facilitate patient-provider communication
(van Uden-Kraan et al. 2008). Patient empowerment also generates improved health
and social outcomes, such as enhanced self-esteem and reduced self-stigma (Bartlett
and Coulson 2011; Wright 2000). In addition, online support groups serve as a place
for people to enact a sense of being, to explore preferred, aspirational, and other
alternate selves (Obodaru 2012).
Online support groups have been broadly studied in CSCW, HCI, and related
fields over the past decades. Prior work has examined online communities for a wide
range of health issues, such as mental illness (Andalibi et al. 2017; De Choudhury
and De 2014), diabetes (Huh and Pratt 2014; Zhang 2017), and breast cancer
(Vlahovic et al. 2014; Yang et al. 2017). Much of the CSCW work on online health
communities has used computational techniques to explore types of self-disclosure,
Online Support Groups for Depression in China: Culturally...
social support, and user interactions (De Choudhury and De 2014; Wang et al. 2012;
Yang et al. 2017). While these studies provide valuable insights into the social
dynamics of online health communities, we know relatively little about the lived
experience of users as well as their struggles and aspirations. It is also unclear how
users integrate online health communities into their lives.
Further, extant research on online mental health communities mainly focuses
on English-speaking users (Andalibi et al. 2017; De Choudhury and De 2014).
Given the unique social and cultural context in China, as we mentioned earlier,
China serves as an interesting case to study the interweaving of culture and
online health community use. However, there has been scarce literature on
online support groups in China. Li et al. (2016)‘s study is among the very
few to examine how Chinese people use online depression forums. Other
studies of Chinese online health communities employed computational methods
to explore the types of social support and user interactions (Wu et al. 2017; Xu
and Zhang 2015), and thus lost out on the opportunity to gain specific insights
into the socio-cultural aspect of online interactions.
In this paper, we draw attention to the role of culture in influencing online support
group use. In particular, we explore the online interactions, motivations, and benefits
among users of an online depression community in China. By examining how people
use online support groups to manage depression, we uncover the meaning of online
health community in the lives of its users. Specifically, we address the following
research questions:
RQ1. How do people with depression in China use online support groups?
RQ2. What motivates people with depression in China to engage in online
support groups?
RQ3. What are the benefits and challenges of online support group engagement
in China?
3. Methods
We conducted a virtual ethnography of Sunshine, the largest and most popular online
forum for people with mental illness in China. Virtual ethnography has been used to
explore the communities and cultures created through computer-mediated interaction
(Hine 2000). We observed user interactions and discussion topics on Sunshine for
four months. We also conducted semi-structured interviews with 15 users to probe
their motivations for using Sunshine and the perceived benefits. The research site,
data collection, and analysis procedures are discussed in greater detail below.
3.1. Research Site: Sunshine
Launched in 2003, Sunshine is the first online forum for mental disorders in China. It
had 161,211 registered members and over 990,000 posts as of August 4, 2017. The
Zhang Renwen et al.
forum contains six discussion sections, including Depression, Anxiety Disorder,
Resources, Life, Religions, and Administrative Affairs. In this study, we focused
on the Depression section, which is the largest and most active section.
Sunshine is a publicly accessible forum. Anyone can browse the posts as a visitor,
but only registered users are allowed to post and reply. Most of the registered users
are people diagnosed with mental illness and their family members. Some are not
diagnosed but suspect that they have mental health problems. Visitors who want to
register are required to send an online request with appropriate reasons, which may
be granted approval by administrators. Registered users each have a profile page
displaying their personal information (e.g., pseudonym, gender, registration date),
status updates, posts, friends, and albums. They can also send private messages to
others via the chat channel.
A peer-led support group, Sunshine is governed by several administrators and
moderators, who are either veteran users or those who have recovered from depression.
They manage different sections of the forum and can delete spammed, offensive,
or inappropriate posts and ban users who do not follow the community norms
from posting. A few psychologists occasionally participate in Sunshine, answering
users’ questions and posting articles.
Sunshine also has private chat groups that operate through QQ, an instant
messaging service in China. Separate from the forum, QQ groups are places where
users communicate with each other in a synchronous fashion. Only registered users
of the forum are allowed to join the QQ groups. The QQ groups include a main QQ
group with over 800 members, and 24 sub-groups featuring different provinces and
different issues. There is also a WeChat official account of Sunshine, managed by
forum administrators who post articles regarding knowledge about and treatment of
depression. Anyone who follows the WeChat account can view the articles, but no
interaction takes place on this platform. Given our interest in the dynamics of
interactions in online support groups, this study primarily focuses on the forum
and the main QQ group.
3.2. Data Collection
The first author conducted virtual ethnography in Sunshine for over four months in
2015 (Hine 2000). The first author registered for an account by contacting a forum
administrator and disclosing the identity as a researcher and the research objectives.
All data collected in this phase was conducted in Mandarin Chinese. The first author, a
native Mandarin speaker, observed the forum and its main QQ group to explore its
culture and user interactions, without initiating or participating in any discussions. The
author spent an hour per day on average in Sunshine, observing conversations and
collecting publically-available posts illustrative of group interactions. A total of 562
posts were collected from more than 100 forum users, covering a wide array of topics.
Given the public nature of the forum and the anonymity of the users, we did
not perceive any potential risks to subjects in conducting observations and
Online Support Groups for Depression in China: Culturally...
collecting posts. Excerpts of the collected posts used in this study were
attributed to anonymized users, without disclosing their user names on the
forum. We believed that it would be difficult to identify those users based on
their posts because of the changes to the wording once they were translated to
English. All data collection was conducted in accordance with the first author’s
university policies at the time of collection.
The first author conducted follow-up interviews with 15 users to understand their
motivations for using Sunshine and the perceived consequences. The interviews
were conducted via telephone or instant messaging application (i.e., QQ). Each
interview lasted from one hour to two hours and followed a semi-structured protocol.
We used a maximum variation purposive sampling strategy by recruiting participants
who had varied levels of depression and engagement in the forum during our
observation period. Recruitment messages were sent to 33 users through the private
chat channel of the forum, describing the purpose of this study and the voluntary
nature of participation. Fifteen members agreed to participate in the study, including
7 females and 8 males (Table 1). All participants’ names used in this study are
pseudonyms, different from their user names in the forum. The presentation of this
research, and the steps taken to preserve user anonymity and confidentiality, are
informed by the ACM Ethics guidelines (ACM 2018).
3.3. Data Analysis
We first conducted a content analysis of the 562 posts collected to identify the themes
of the online interactions among Sunshine users. All interviews were audio-recorded
and transcribed in Chinese; illustrative quotes were translated from Chinese into
Table 1. Participant demographics as of August 2015.
ID Alias Gender Age Time with diagnosed depression Length of membership
1 Lily Female 19 A few months 2 months
2 Nikolas Male 28 Over 10 years 4 months
3 Mars Male 40s 20 years; recovered 4 months
4 Frank Male 35 17 years 5 years
5 Aaron Male 24 2 years 8 months
6 Brian Male 27 5 years 4 months
7 Catherine Female NA A few months 6 months
8 Jack Male 30s 9 years 6 months
9 Daisy Female 25 5 years 4 months
10 Rachel Female 40s 6 years 6 years
11 Stephen Male 40s 9 years 9 years
12 Mary Female 20s 9 years 9 years
13 Adam Male 63 15 years 3 years
14 Julie Female 30s 8 years 6 years
15 Elena Female NA 2 years 2 years
Zhang Renwen et al.
English by the first author who is also fluent in English. Open coding was first
conducted in Chinese, and then two of the authors iterated axial coding in English,
identifying themes regarding engagement in Sunshine, as well as benefits that the
participants received from the engagement (Strauss and Corbin 1998). Extensive
memos were written to document the analytical trajectory, which provided a basis for
data analysis. The primary themes that emerged from the analysis are discussed in
detail in the following section.
4. Findings
The online observations captured the dynamics of the interactions among
Sunshine users (RQ1). The interview participants offered nuanced accounts of
why they participated in Sunshine (RQ2) and how they benefited from the
engagement (RQ3). In this section, we first present the types of social interactions
in Sunshine based on the observations, followed by users’ motivations for
use and the impact of Sunshine on users. The combination of observational data
and interview data offers us a holistic picture of the use of Sunshine and its
meaning in the lives of its users.
4.1. Social Interactions in Sunshine
4.1.1. Information Exchange: Medication and Coping Skills
Information exchange was the most common practice among Sunshine users. Of the
562 posts we collected, almost half of them (48%) were related to medication. We
observed myriad posts on the forum asking about the use and side effects of
antidepressants. Some users expressed their mistrust towards the ‘Western medicine’
in their posts and asked if they should take the antidepressants prescribed by their
doctors. Others experienced severe side effects after taking medicines and posted
their symptoms on Sunshine to seek advice from their peers. For instance, a forum
user posted her anxiety and despair after taking antidepressants:
My brain functioning declined after taking Lexapro and Magnesium for three
months. I had a hard time memorizing things and solving simple math problems.
I’m going to take the College Entrance Exam soon and get so terrified about the
side effects of the drugs. What should I do? Should I continue taking them? I feel
hopeless and desperate. Please help me! (Anonymous forum user)
In addition, users asked and shared experiences and strategies in coping with
depression. Some mentioned that they took traditional Chinese medicine as a
complement to antidepressants, and used acupuncture and practiced Tai Chi to
relieve pain and anxiety. They described how they practiced these coping strategies,
and what worked well and what failed. The information was either exchanged
through Q&A, or shared in users’ public diaries and stories.
Online Support Groups for Depression in China: Culturally...
4.1.2. Peer Diagnosis and Peer Therapy
We also observed many users posting messages describing their symptoms in great
detail, asking others to assess their problems (32%). We labeled this type of interaction
as peer diagnosis. Some of those who engaged in peer diagnosis had not obtained a
formal diagnosis from a doctor, but suspected that they had depression. Others,
however, posted their symptoms along with the diagnosis from doctors, asking their
peers to help confirm the diagnosis. Often, they would receive comments from other
users, who provided their own assessment and encouraged them to seek treatment
from a trustworthy psychiatrist. Here is a post characteristic of this type of interaction:
I feel like I am having depression but I am not sure. I took the PHQ-9 screening
test on Sunshine and was scored as having moderate depression. Is it clinically
validated? I have experienced insomnia, lack of energy, physical pain, and low
mood for almost a month. Can anything tell me if I am depressed or not? Please!!!
(Anonymized forum user)
Sunshine users also practiced peer therapy by disclosing their thoughts and
emotions. When a user posted his or her negative feelings, others would jump in
and identify the problematic thinking that may contribute to the user’s problem, and
offer ways to reframe negative thinking. Many participants mentioned that they did
not feel comfortable talking about their personal issues with a therapist, who was
considered a stranger. Some did not believe a therapist who had never gone through
depression could understand their problems. Thus, they preferred to confide in their
peers rather than therapists.
4.1.3. Public Journaling: Self-Tracking and Storytelling
Sunshine users also kept a public journal of their activities and thoughts on this forum.
22% of the posts we collected fell into this category. Some users wrote diaries on the
forum to record their treatment and daily progress, such as medication, symptoms, and
feelings. Others, however, logged more mundane daily activities – hours slept, food
consumed, exercise, and social interactions. Most users who did public journaling
tracked both their daily activities and treatment. Below is an excerpt from a user’s diary:
May 29th
Today is the third day of taking medication. I slept at 12am and woke up at 4am,
feeling something was stuck in my chest. I lied in bed until 8am and got up to
make breakfast. I ate some cabbage and sausages, which were tasty. After taking
medicines, I went to work. Lunch was bread and salad, same with yesterday. I love
this type of food.
Now is 3pm. Feeling sleepy, I am working while listening to music, A cool
breeze brushes softly against my face. I feel like standing on the brink of a
Zhang Renwen et al.
cliff – not knowing who I am, where I am going, and where I belong to.
(Anonymized forum user)
It was also not uncommon for users to engage in storytelling and narrate their
struggles in fighting with depression with minute details and vivid descriptions. We
observed a large volume of personal stories on the forum (24%). Some users
disclosed what they have experienced in the past, expressing emotions, doing
reflection, and making confessions. Others would respond with similar stories about
themselves and offer positive explanations.
4.1.4. Emotional Support Exchange
As we observed online, many users revealed feelings of frustration and loneliness
in their posts (28%). Other users who read these posts might not provide
concrete solutions, but were able to recognize common experiences and offered
empathy and encouragement. One example is from a Sunshine user who replied
to another user on the forum:
I know how desperate you are, as I have been there. I felt it was the end of the
world but I survived. Just hang in there and take care of yourself. I know it’s hard
to do so when we are mired in depression, but you have to know that you are not
alone. We will always be there for you. Big hug ☺ (Anonymized forum user)
In referring to their own suffering, users tended to use inclusive pronouns
such as ‘we’ and ‘us’ to express empathy towards each other. On the forum,
users identified others as ‘brothers in arms (zhanyou)’ or ‘fellow patients
(bingyou)’, and described depression as a ‘battle’ to be fought with ‘concerted
efforts’. Some used emoji to liven up the text messages and to express their
affection towards their peers.
In the QQ chat group of Sunshine, hundreds of synchronized conversations took
place every day. Compared to the forum, communications in the QQ group were
more casual, covering topics from personal problems to jokes and funny stories.
Members of the QQ group chatted with each other like siblings, calling each other
‘elder brother’, ‘second brother’, ‘little sister’, etc. When a group member – the
‘elder brother’, for instance – showed up in the group, others would greet him with
great affection, saying ‘How you doing today, my dear brother?’ and ‘We’ve been
waiting for you’. Daily issues such as bickering with partners were also discussed
among group members.
4.2. Motivations for Using Sunshine
Users joined Sunshine for a wide variety of reasons, many were intertwined with the
social and cultural contexts in China. The motivations for using Sunshine presented
below were based on our interviews with the 15 users.
Online Support Groups for Depression in China: Culturally...
4.2.1. Understanding Depression
A majority of the participants stated that Sunshine was their primary source of
information about depression. Many encountered Sunshine when they searched for
information about depression using Baidu, a Chinese search engine. They were
tempted to join Sunshine in order to understand depression and find out if they had
depression. Some participants had no idea what depression was before they joined
Sunshine. Others viewed depression as the ‘emotional flu’ that would go away
shortly and thus refused to seek treatment.
In other cases, participants regarded their distress as neurasthenia (shenjing
shuairuo) – or were diagnosed with neurasthenia – a result of weakness in the
kidney and spleen. They used to receive treatment with traditional Chinese
medicine, such as herbals, acupuncture, and exercise (qigong). As the 63-yearold
user, Adam, described:
Depression was largely unknown in China when I first felt depressed in early
2000. I was then diagnosed with neurasthenia and treated with Chinese medicine
for many years. But I felt something was wrong. After I got a computer at home, I
actively searched my symptoms on the Internet and found Sunshine. It was the
first time I heard depression. I was very intrigued and eager to find out what
depression was and whether I was having depression. (Adam)
Even for participants who knew depression, many had difficulty accurately
describing their symptoms to doctors, leading to an inaccurate diagnosis and incorrect
prescription of medicines. Taking inappropriate medicines often produced severe
side effects, causing enormous pain to the them. Thus, participants said that they
spent enormous time on Sunshine, reading the articles about depression and the
experiences shared by other users.
4.2.2. Seeking Mental Health Care
Participants were also prompted to use Sunshine for the purpose of seeking treatment.
This was mostly because of the limited mental health resources in China and a
lack of access to care. Many participants lived in rural areas or small cities, where
mental hospitals and licensed therapists were scarce. They had to travel long
distances to the nearest large city, spending extensive amounts of time, energy, and
money. Rachel, for example, described her struggles in finding doctors:
I had no idea where to find a psychiatrist when I first suspected I had depression. I
lived in [a small county], where no mental hospital existed. I took a two-hour train
to the best hospital in our province...However, the so-called ‘expert’ only asked
me to fill out a survey and diagnosed me with depression within 10 minutes. It was
too sloppy for me to believe in it. Hopelessly, I posted a message on Sunshine
asking where to find a qualified psychiatrist. Many people encouraged me to see
doctors in Beijing and recommended a couple prestigious hospitals. Following
Zhang Renwen et al.
their instructions, I took an overnight train to Beijing Anding Hospital and was
finally diagnosed with depression. (Rachel)
Even for participants who had visited mental hospitals in big cities, many
described receiving an inaccurate diagnosis, or being prescribed inappropriate medication.
For example, four participants received treatment for depression for many
years until they realized that they actually had bipolar disorder after joining Sunshine.
Furthermore, some complained that psychiatrists from different hospitals sometimes
gave different or contradictory advice and prescriptions, prompting them to seek
advice from their peers.
Notably, many participants expressed a feeling of mistrust towards mental health
professionals. They complained that good psychiatrists were extremely scarce,
which corresponded to the fact that only 20% of the psychiatrists in China are fully
qualified (Xiang et al. 2012). Negative interactions with unprofessional doctors
dissuaded them from seeking treatment and propelled them to turn to Sunshine for
advice. For instance, Aaron expressed his attitudes towards doctors:
Doctors are profit-oriented; they always ask you to purchase expensive medicine
even though you don’t need it. Peers are more reliable; they know what works and
what doesn’t work. (Aaron)
By describing other Sunshine users as Bknowledgeable^, Bexperienced^, and
Btrustworthy^, our participants treated the online support group, to some extent, as
a hospital or counseling center, with a great number of reliable therapists who had
rich experience in managing mental illness. Although peer expertise was not equivalent
to professional medical advice, many participants said that they trusted information
from their peers more than from clinicians.
4.2.3. Unburdening and Self-Expression
Despite the need for information seeking, users also turned to Sunshine for selfexpression.
For those who wrote extensive personal stories, they described this
behavior as a way to unburden themselves. Brian, for instance, posted more than
50 posts on the forum, most of which were personal experiences and feelings. He
explained his motivation as follows:
I was in great despair then. A number of factors such as work, relationship, and
illness conspired to torture me, day in and day out. I found my life meaningless and
I wanted to end my life. But I had no guts to do so. So I posted my thoughts and
emotions on the forum, sometimes several times a day. I didn’t expect feedback
from others; just wanted to get my feelings out there, to reduce stress. (Brian)
Brian’s narratives spoke to his need for venting negative feelings. He explained
that the mere act of writing things down led to emotional catharsis, which gave him a
Online Support Groups for Depression in China: Culturally...
sense of relief and reduced stress. Even though the cathartic effect was sometimes
transient, our participants experienced decreased negative emotions after getting their
feelings ‘out there’.
Related to these feelings of relief, participants described online support
groups as a ‘safe haven’, where they could open up without the fear of being
judged or condemned by others. Because of the mental illness stigma, many
have experienced negative treatment in the workplace or in social interactions,
and therefore have chosen to conceal their emotions. The anonymity of Sunshine
gave them the freedom of expression, the ability to self-disclose without
being judged. As Frank described:
No one knows who I am on the Internet. I can write down everything – I mean
those at the bottom of my heart – and reflect on my past behaviors and experiences.
(Frank)
4.2.4. Seeking Acceptance and Empathy
Participants also joined Sunshine to seek understanding and acceptance from
others. Given the lack of understanding of depression and stigma in the
society, many described being rejected by their family and friends, who
sometimes dismissed their feelings, or refused to talk about their illness. As
Aaron described:
My parents are peasants, uneducated, without any knowledge about depression.
They couldn’t understand my problem and blame me for being weak. I used to be
very close to them but now we seldom talk. I don’t have any close friends, either. I
don't know whom I should talk to…I feel so lonely. (Aaron)
Some experienced a lack of offline social support because they worked far away
from their hometown. Because of China’s rapid urbanization, some participants were
migrant workers who took temporary jobs in faraway urban regions and returned
home only during the Lunar New Year. They contended that the long distance
isolated them from their family members and close friends and deprived them of
the social support they used to have when at home.
The social isolation of our participants was also associated with family
‘face’. Among Chinese people, because the behavior of the individual reflects
on the family, those stigmatized illnesses such as depression were regarded as
threatening the ‘face’ of one’s family. Therefore, some participants told us that
their parents urged them to conceal their mental illness condition to protect
family ‘face’ and even dissuaded them from seeking treatment. Some experienced
rejection or distancing in the workplace and felt ostracized. For example,
one interview participant, Brian, described being fired by his company after he
took sick leave for mental health.
Zhang Renwen et al.
4.2.5. Cultivating Healthy Habits
For those participants who kept journaling on Sunshine, some undertook this
behavior to build up healthy habits and cultivate coping skills. They believed
that online support groups could promote healthy behavior. Mary, for example,
logged her daily diet and exercise over a year and still kept a journal on the
forum even after rehabilitation. She described her motives as holding herself
accountable for regular exercise:
I decided to stop taking the antidepressant in 2014. The psychiatrist suggested that
I should do exercise every day to expedite rehabilitation. But it was so hard for me
to do that. To motivate myself, I decided to keep a journal on the forum,
documenting my daily activities, including exercise and healthy eating. I had
the habit of journaling, but privately. Making it public motivated me to be
persistent. Everyone was watching me. I had to keep my word. (Mary)
In addition, some engaged in public journaling for the purpose of self-reflection.
Since people with depression often experienced declined memory, participants
described writing a diary as a way to remind them of what they did for the day and
modified their behaviors accordingly.
4.3. The Impact of Sunshine on Users
In this section, we provide interview participants’ accounts regarding how they
benefited from participating in Sunshine, as well as the negative experiences they had.
4.3.1. Increased Knowledge and Better Coping
A major benefit of engaging in Sunshine, as many participants described, was to
better understand depression and what it means to have depression. Obtaining
information from peers enabled users to think through the nature of their distress
and seek appropriate treatment. Some were encouraged to seek therapy, obtain a
formal diagnosis, and take medicine. Participants also reported being exposed to a
wide array of coping strategies by reading others’ posts on the forum, which helped
them to make more informed choices regarding help-seeking and treatment.
With increased knowledge, participants felt more control over their illness and
gained the confidence to communicate with psychiatrists. Some mentioned that they
could describe their symptoms more accurately during the clinic visit and they were
able to bring up their issues and concerns to their doctors, rather than blindly
following what they suggested. Jack described his experience as follows:
I learned a lot about the merits and side effects of different types of antidepressants
[from Sunshine]. Once a psychiatrist prescribed an antidepressant about which I
had heard horrible side effects from other users. Then I told the psychiatrist my
concern and he prescribed another one that worked well for me. I felt like I saved
Online Support Groups for Depression in China: Culturally...
my life! I would not have been able to communicate with doctors without the
knowledge I acquired from Sunshine. (Jack)
In addition, for those who wrote personal stories and diaries on the forum,
they stated that the process of storytelling allowed them to make meaning of
their experiences and to reframe negative thinking. Many said that this
reframing process was in line with cognitive behavioral therapy and helped
them to view things from a positive light.
4.3.2. Reconstruction of Normality
Given the stigma associated with depression in China, many participants described
feeling worthless, rejected, and abandoned. The online support group, however,
became a ‘safe haven’, where they could open up without being judged or
condemned by others. Daisy, 25, said that before she joined Sunshine, she often
posted on Weibo – a Chinese version of Twitter – when feeling depressed. But she
ended up being ‘unfriended (lahei)’ by her friends on Weibo who also shied away
from her offline. The anonymous nature of online support groups, however, made her
feel less vulnerable:
I can say whatever I want in Sunshine. People understand me and never judge. I
feel like I’m a normal person here, not inferior to anyone. (Daisy)
A feeling of ‘being normal’ was constantly mentioned by our participants. The
mutual experience of depression created a strong sense of identification within the
group, which made participants feel accepted and normal, sometimes for the first time
in years. In his post, Frank presented his story of struggling with depression for over ten
years after a devastating breakup with his girlfriend. Frank described being treated as a
‘monster’ for a long time, and felt a sense of relief after sharing his story in Sunshine:
The moment I posted it on Sunshine, I felt a sense of relief, a feeling of being
forgiven by others and by myself. You can view it (the post) as a monolog or my
confession. I wrote it to myself. I don’t have the guts to tell anyone around me,
including my parents, in fear of being judged or criticized. I’ve had enough of
being treated as a monster over the past 12 years. (Frank)
Similarly, other participants who felt rejected by others in their lives also stressed
the non-judgmental acceptance in Sunshine, which allowed them to vent, to cry, and
to be vulnerable. By positioning themselves as part of this group, the participants
constructed a normal self in spite of the social stigma.
4.3.3. Enhanced Self-Efficacy and Self-Esteem
Participants also benefited from sharing information and experiences with others.
Although some reported helping others out of altruism and reciprocity, they all
Zhang Renwen et al.
emphasized a sense of fulfillment gained from sharing information with others. In
Sunshine, veteran users sometimes took on the role of mentor, through which they
demonstrated expertise and strength. They felt empowered by acting as experts in
this community as a result of self-learning and self-improvement. Mars, for instance,
was in his 40s and had recovered from depression after wrestling with it for almost
20 years. He frequently answered others’ questions on the forum and sometimes
wrote articles about treatment. He told us:
I love answering others’ questions. Young people on the forum respected me.
They sought my advice and regarded me as an expert. This made me feel
powerful…I am indeed an expert. I know much more than the doctors, who
learned depression from textbooks rather than from experiences. (Mars)
For those participants who kept a public journal on the forum, many
commented that recording daily progress gave them a positive outlook based
on control and strength. For instance, Catherine wrote diaries on the forum to
record a wide variety of activates, such as medication, reading, yoga, and
social activities. She described an elevated sense of self-control through the
journaling practices:
I felt increased self-discipline after posting diaries on Sunshine. I became more
organized than before, thanks to others’ encouragement and follow-up. My mom
always thought that I got depression because of a lack of self-control, but I’m not
like that. (Catherine)
Participants regarded this sense of control as important, given that they were
viewed in society as unable to resolve their inner problems or conflicts. Engaging in
public journaling gave group members the ability to exercise self-control and selfregulation.
In this sense, the online diaries served as a demonstration of their strong
will. For instance, a message posted on Sunshine says:
People think of us as pessimistic and weak, but we are NOT! Most of us are
fighting with depression with a strong will and optimistic attitude. We have to
prove that we are not sore-losers. Write down your daily progress and share it with
others. Although the society has abandoned us, we shouldn’t abandon ourselves!
(Post by an anonymized forum user)
By recording daily progress and posting optimistic messages, users were
claiming a life they wanted to lead, a mindset they hoped to sustain. They
presented themselves as people who proactively and positively wrestle with
depression, rather than being Bpessimistic and weak^. The post above also
demonstrated a collective effort of users to challenge dominant views of
depression and public stigma.
Online Support Groups for Depression in China: Culturally...
4.3.4. Elevated Sense of Belonging
Many participants thought of themselves as part of a larger collective, who
were making ‘concerted efforts’ to fight depression. For them, the ‘enemy’ was
not only depression, but also rejection from others and the society. Taking part
in online support groups, however, provided them with a sense of belonging,
affiliation, and social cohesion that they were longing for. Daisy, for instance,
held a deep affection for Sunshine:
When I was diagnosed with depression, I felt my life was screwed up and
attempted to commit suicide twice. I felt extremely isolated since nobody could
understand what it was like to have depression. So, you know, when I accidentally
encountered Sunshine, I was so exhilarated that couldn’t help crying. It was then
that I realized I was not alone. There were a lot of people who shared the same
sufferings but held positive attitudes toward life and encouraged each other…We
talk with each other like a family. (Lily)
Similarly, other participants also positioned Sunshine as a Bfamily^, full of
their siblings who were Bcaring^, Bempathic^ and Bsupportive^. Some mentioned
that they were the only child in their family, but other users whom they
often talked to were like their brothers and sisters. They shared sorrows and
happiness, and were always ready to provide help and support when others
were in need.
As the bond among the users intensified, they felt the need to get together offline.
Some users residing in the same city would go to dinner or bike together. For
instance, Mary has joined several offline activities with other users. She described
these events as ‘relaxing and heartening’ and providing her strength:
Every time we gathered offline, hiking or biking together, we took a group photo.
No one said BCheese^. We cried BFight depression! We are strong!^ with our
clenched fists. (Mary)
In addition to offline gatherings, administrators of the forum and some veteran
users also gave lectures to communities and universities, and participated in TV
shows to talk about their experiences and spread knowledge about depression.
Although none of our interview participants did this, they felt proud of these users
who spoke up for them.
4.3.5. Negative Experiences – Regulation and Emotional Contagion
As much as the online support group fostered a sense of community, it also created
tensions. As a well-regulated forum, Sunshine had its own norms, such as rules of
speech, written in an eight-chapter document on the forum. Several administrators
and moderators were in charge of regulating Sunshine and punishing users who did
not follow the community norms. The most common punishment for users was being
Zhang Renwen et al.
banned from posting (jinyan), from a week to indefinably. The case of Stephen was
an exemplar. Stephen was with Sunshine for 8 years but ended up being indefinitely
banned from posting because of his offensive messages. He expressed his frustration
over this decision:
I am very angry and disappointed about the decision. I couldn’t understand why
they (admins) are so cruel to me. I came to Sunshine in seeking understanding and
acceptance, yet was regarded as a madman to be regulated. Is there any difference
between those administrators and the discriminatory public? (Stephen)
In addition, some interview participants described being ‘infected’ by the negative
emotions and thoughts of others. When users were in a depressive episode, they
tended to post messages with intense emotions, which would be transferred to others
who read the post. The transference of emotions sometimes aggravated users’
depression, and even triggered depressive episodes or suicidal ideation. Julie said
her strategy to counteract the negative influence was to avoid using Sunshine when
she was emotionally stable:
There are so many negative emotions there. If I am in the process of
recovery, I seldom look at the forum or interact with other members, for
fear of being infected. I am too fragile to resist those negative effects. I only
use Sunshine when I feel bad– usually when I go through a depressive
episode. This is unburdening. (Julie)
Despite the challenges faced by the users, most participants described
benefiting from their engagement in Sunshine. In the next section, we will
delve into the findings and analyze how Chinese cultural values influence the
use of online support groups.
