MIMIC: An Adaptive Mixed Initiative Spoken Dialogue System for
Information Queries
Jennifer Chu-Carroll
Lucent Technologies Bell Laboratories
600 Mountain Avenue
Murray Hill, NJ 07974, U.S.A.
jencc@research.bell-labs.com
Abstract
This paper describes MIMIC, an adaptive mixed initiative spoken dialogue system that provides movie showtime information. MIMIC improves upon previous
dialogue systems in two respects. First, it employs
initiative-oriented strategy adaptation to automatically
adapt response generation strategies based on the cumulative effect of information dynamically extracted from
user utterances during the dialogue. Second, MIMIC's
dialogue management architecture decouples its initiative module from the goal and response strategy selection processes, providing a general framework for developing spoken dialogue systems with different adaptation
behavior.
1 Introduction
In recent years, speech and natural language technologies have matured enough to enable the development of
spoken dialogue systems in limited domains. Most existing systems employ dialogue strategies pre-specified
during the design phase of the dialogue manager without taking into account characteristics of actual dialogue
interactions. More specifically, mixed initiative systems
typically employ rules that specify conditions (generally
based on local dialogue context) under which initiative
may shift from one agent to the other. Previous research,
on the other hand, has shown that changes in initiative
strategies in human-human dialogues can be dynamically
modeled in terms of characteristics of the user and of
the on-going dialogue (Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998)
and that adaptability of initiative strategies in dialogue
systems leads to better system performance (Litman and
Pan, 1999). However, no previous dialogue system takes
into account these dialogue characteristics or allows for
initiative-oriented adaptation of dialogue strategies.
In this paper, we describe MIMIC, a voice-enabled
telephone-based dialogue system that provides movie
showtime information, emphasizing its dialogue management aspects. MIMIC improves upon previous systems along two dimensions. First, MIMIC automatically adapts dialogue strategies based on participant
roles, characteristics of the current utterance, and dialogue history. This automatic adaptation allows appropriate dialogue strategies to be employed based on both
local dialogue context and dialogue history, and has been
shown to result in significantly better performance than
non-adaptive systems. Second, MIMIC employs an initiative module that is decoupled from the goal selection
process in the dialogue manager, while allowing the outcome of both components to jointly determine the strategies chosen for response generation. As a result, MIMIC
can exhibit drastically different dialogue behavior with
very minor adjustments to parameters in the initiative
module, allowing for rapid development and comparison
of experimental prototypes and resulting in general and
portable dialogue systems.
2 Adaptive Mixed Initiative Dialogue
Management
2.1 Motivation
In naturally occurring human-human dialogues, speakers
often adopt different dialogue strategies based on hearer
characteristics, dialogue history, etc. For instance, the
speaker may provide more guidance if the hearer is having difficulty making progress toward task completion,
while taking a more passive approach when the hearer
is an expert in the domain. Our main goal is to enable
a spoken dialogue system to simulate such human behavior by dynamically adapting dialogue strategies during an interaction based on information that can be automatically detected from the dialogue. Figure 1 shows
an excerpt from a dialogue between MIMIC and an actual user where the user is attempting to find the times
at which the movie Analyze This playing at theaters in
Montclair. S and U indicate system and user utterances,
respectively, and the italicized utterances are the output
of our automatic speech recognizer. In addition, each
system turn is annotated with its task and dialogue initiative holders, where task initiative tracks the lead in the
process toward achieving the dialogue participants' domain goal, while dialogue initiative models the lead in
determining the current discourse focus (Chu-Carroll and
Brown, 1998). In our information query application domain, the system has task (and thus dialogue) initiative if
its utterances provide helpful guidance toward achieving
the user's domain goal, as in utterances (6) and (7) where
MIMIC provided valid response choices to its query intending to solicit a theater name, while the system has
97
dialogue but not task initiative if its utterances only specify the current discourse goal, as in utterance (4).1
This dialogue illustrates several features of our adaptive mixed initiative dialogue manager. First, MIMIC automatically adapted the initiative distribution based on
information extracted from user utterances and dialogue
history. More specifically, MIMIC took over task initiative in utterance (6), after failing to obtain a valid answer to its query soliciting a missing theater name in (4).
It retained task initiative until utterance (12), after the
user implicitly indicated her intention to take over task
initiative by providing a fully-specified query (utterance
(11)) to a limited prompt (utterance (10)). Second, initiative distribution may affect the strategies MIMIC selects to achieve its goals. For instance, in the context
of soliciting missing information, when MIMIC did not
have task initiative, a simple information-seeking query
was generated (utterance (4)). On the other hand, when
MIMIC had task initiative, additional guidance was provided (in the form of valid response choices in utterance
(6)), which helped the user successfully respond to the
system's query. In the context of prompting the user for
a new query, when MIMIC had task initiative, a limited prompt was selected to better constrain the user's
response (utterance (10)), while an open-ended prompt
was generated to allow the user to take control of the
problem-solving process otherwise (utterances (1) and
(13)).
In the next section, we briefly review a framework for
dynamic initiative modeling. In Section 3, we discuss
how this framework was incorporated into the dialogue
management component of a spoken dialogue system to
allow for automatic adaptation of dialogue strategies. Finally, we outline experiments evaluating the resulting
system and show that MIMIC's automatic adaptation capabilities resulted in better system performance.
2.2 An Evidential Framework for Modeling
Initiative
In previous work, we proposed a framework for modeling initiative during dialogue interaction (Chu-Carroll
and Brown, 1998). This framework predicts task and dialogue initiative holders on a turn-by-turn basis in humanhuman dialogues based on participant roles (such as each
dialogue agent's level of expertise and the role that she
plays in the application domain), cues observed in the
current dialogue turn, and dialogue history. More specifically, we utilize the Dempster-Shafer theory (Shafer,
1976; Gordon and Shortliffe, 1984), and represent the
current initiative distribution as two basic probability assignments (bpas) which indicate the amount of support
for each dialogue participant having the task and dialogue initiatives. For instance, the bpa mt—cur ({S)) =
'Although the dialogues we collected in our experiments (Section 5) include cases in which MIMIC has neither initiative, such cases
are rare in this application domain, and will not be discussed further in
this paper.
0.3, Mt—cur({U}) = 0.7 indicates that, with all evidence
taken into account, there is more support (to the degree
0.7) for the user having task initiative in the current turn
than for the system. At the end of each turn, the bpas
are updated based on the effects that cues observed during that turn have on changing them, and the new bpas
are used to predict the next task and dialogue initiative
holders.
In this framework, cues that affect initiative distribution include NoNewInfo, triggered when the speaker simply repeats or rephrases an earlier utterance, implicitly
suggesting that the speaker may want to give up initiative, AmbiguousActions, triggered when the speaker proposes an action that is ambiguous in the application domain, potentially prompting the hearer to take over initiative to resolve the detected ambiguity, etc. The effects that each cue has on changing the current bpas
are also represented as bpas, which were determined by
an iterative training procedure using a corpus of transcribed dialogues where each turn was annotated with the
task/dialogue initiative holders and the observed cues.
The bpas for the next turn are computed by combining
the bpas representing the current initiative distribution
and the bpas representing the effects of cues observed
during the current turn, using Dempster's combination
rule (Gordon and Shortliffe, 1984). The task and dialogue initiative holders are then predicted based on the
new bpas. This framework was evaluated using annotated dialogues from four task-oriented domains, achieving, on average, a correct prediction rate of 97% and 88%
for task and dialogue initiative holders, respectively. In
Section 3.2, we discuss how this predictive model is converted into a generative model by enabling the system to
automatically detect cues that were previously labelled
manually. We further discuss how the model is used
by the dialogue manager for dynamic dialogue strategy
adaptation.
3 MIMIC: Mixed Initiative Movie
Information Consultant
MIMIC is a telephone-based dialogue system that provides movie showtime information. It consists of the following main components, implemented on a distributed,
client-server architecture (Zhou et al., 1997):
1. Telephony server: this component detects rings
and hang-ups, and enables streaming of audio data
on channels of a telephony board.
2. Speech recognizer: the recognizer receives audio
data from the telephony server and generates the
word string hypothesis that best matches the audio
input. We used the Lucent Automatic Speech Recognizer (Reichl and Chou, 1998; Ortmanns et al.,
1999), configured to use class-based probabilistic ngram language models to allow for rapid updates of
movie/theater/town names.
98
Utterance Task Dialogue
Initiative Initiative
S: Hello, this is MIMIC, the movie information system. User System
How can I help you?
U: What time is Analyze This playing in Montclair?
[what time is analyze this playing in montclair]
S: What theater would you like? User System
U: Montclair.
[montclair]
S: Choices for theater are Wellmont Theater and Clearviews Screening Zone. System System
What theater would you like?
U: Clearviews Screening Zone.
[urn movie screening zone]
S: Analyze This is playing at Clearviews Screening Zone in Montclair at 1:15pm, 4:10pm, System System
and 6:30pm.
Please say the name of the movie or theater or town you would like information about.
U: What time is Analyze This playing at the Wellmont Theater?
[what time is analyze this playing at the wellmont theater]
S: Analyze This is playing at Wellmont Theater in Montclair at 3:15pm, 5:45pm, 8:20pm, User System
and 10:10pm.
Can I help you with anything else?
Figure 1: Excerpt of an Adaptive Mixed Initiative Dialogue
3. NLP/Dialogue component: this main application
dependent component receives a user utterance hypothesis from the speech recognizer, and generates
system utterance(s) in response. Three major tasks
are carried out by this component: 1) semantic interpretation, which constructs frame-based semantic representations from user utterances, 2) dialogue
management, where response strategies are selected
based on the semantic representation of the user's
utterance, system's domain knowledge, and initiative distribution, and 3) utterance generation, where
utterance templates are chosen and instantiated to
realize the selected response strategies. These three
tasks will be discussed in further detail in the rest of
this section.
4. Text-to-speech engine: the TTS system receives
the word string comprising the system's response
from the dialogue component and converts the text
into speech for output over the telephone. We used
the Bell Labs TTS system (Sproat, 1998), which
in addition to converting plain text into speech, accepts text strings annotated to override default pitch
height, accent placement, speaking rate, etc.2
3.1 Semantic Interpretation
MIMIC utilizes a non-recursive frame-based semantic
representation commonly used in spoken dialogue systems (e.g. (Seneff et al., 1991; Lamel, 1998)), which
represents an utterance as a set of attribute-value pairs.
Figure 2(a) shows the frame-based semantic representation for the utterance &quot;What time is Analyze This playing
2 See (Nakatani and Chu-Carroll, 2000) for how MIMIC's dialoguelevel knowledge is used to override default prosodic assignments for
concept-to-speech generation.
Question-Type: When
Movie: Analyze This
Theater: null
Town: Montclair
(a) Semantic Representation
Question-Type: When
Movie: mandatory
Theater: mandatory
Town: optional
(b) Task Specification
Figure 2: Semantic Representation and Task Specification
in Montclair?&quot;
MIMIC's semantic representation is constructed by
first extracting, for each attribute, a set of keywords from
the user utterance. Using a vector-based topic identification process (Salton, 1971; Chu-Carroll and Carpenter, 1999), these keywords are used to determine a set
of likely values (including null) for that attribute. Next,
the utterance is interpreted with respect to the dialogue
history and the system's domain knowledge. This allows MIMIC to handle elliptical sentences and anaphoric
references, as well as automatically infer missing values
and detect inconsistencies in the current representation.
This semantic representation allows for decoupling
of domain-dependent task specifications and domain
99
independent dialogue management strategies. Each
query type is specified by a template indicating, for each
attribute, whether a value must, must not, or can optionally be provided in order for a query to be considered
well-formed. Figure 2(b) shows that to solicit movie
showtime information (question type when), a movie
name and a theater name must be provided, whereas a
town may optionally be provided. These specifications
are determined based on domain semantics, and must be
reconstructed when porting the system to a new domain.
3.2 Dialogue Management
Given a semantic representation, the dialogue history and
the system's domain knowledge, the dialogue manager
selects a set of strategies that guides MIMIC's response
generation process. This task is carried out by three
subprocesses: 1) initiative modeling, which determines
the initiative distribution for the system's dialogue turn,
2) goal selection, which identifies a goal that MIMIC's
response attempts to achieve, and 3) strategy selection,
which chooses, based on the initiative distribution, a set
of dialogue acts that MIMIC will adopt in its attempt to
realize the selected goal.
3.2.1 Initiative Modeling
MIMIC's initiative module determines the task and dialogue initiative holders for each system turn in order
to enable dynamic strategy adaptation. It automatically
detects cues triggered during the current user turn, and
combines the effects of these cues with the current initiative distribution to determine the initiative holders for
the system's turn.
Cue Detection The cues and the bpas representing
their effects are largely based on a subset of those described in (Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998),3 as shown
in Figures 3(a) and 3(b). Figure 3(a) shows that observation of TakeOverTask supports a task initiative shift
to the speaker to the degree .35. The remaining support is assigned to 0, the set of all possible conclusions
(i.e., {speaker,hearer}), indicating that to the degree .65,
observation of this cue does not commit to identifying
which dialogue participant should have task initiative in
the next dialogue turn.
The cues used in MIMIC are classified into two categories, discourse cues and analytical cues, based on the
types of knowledge needed to detect them:
I. Discourse cues, which can be detected by considering the semantic representation of the current utterance and dialogue history:
• TakeOverTask, an implicit indication that the
user wants to take control of the problemsolving process, triggered when the user provides more information than the discourse expectation.
3We selected only those cues that can be automatically detected in
a spoken dialogue system with speech recognition errors and limited
semantic interpretation capabilities.
• NoNewInfo, an indication that the user is unable to make progress toward task completion,
triggered when the semantic representations of
two consecutive user turns are identical (a result of the user not knowing what to say or the
speech recognizer failing to recognize the user
utterances).
2. Analytical cues, which can only be detected by taking into account MIMIC's domain knowledge:
• InvalidAction, an indication that the user made
an invalid assumption about the domain, triggered when the system database lookup based
on the user's query returns null.
• InvalidActionResolved, triggered when the
previous invalid assumption is corrected.
• AmbiguousAction, an indication that the user
query is not well-formed, triggered when a
mandatory attribute is unspecified or when
more than one value is specified for an attribute.
• AmbiguousActionResolved, triggered when the
attribute in question is uniquely instantiated.
Computing Initiative Distribution To determine the
initiative distribution, the bpas representing the effects
of cues detected in the current user utterance are instantiated (i.e., speaker/hearer in Figure 3 are instantiated as
system/user accordingly). These effects are then interpreted with respect to the current initiative distribution
by applying Dempster's combination rule (Gordon and
Shortliffe, 1984) to the bpas representing the current initiative distribution and the instantiated bpas. This results
in two new bpas representing the task and dialogue initiative distributions for the system's turn. The dialogue participant with the greater degree of support for having the
task/dialogue initiative in these bpas is the task/dialogue
initiative holder for the system's turn4 (see Section 4 for
an example).
3.2.2 Goal Selection
The goal selection module selects a goal that MIMIC attempts to achieve in its response by utilizing information from analytical cue detection as shown in Figure 4.
MIMIC's goals focus on two aspects of cooperative dialogue interaction: 1) initiating subdialogues to resolve
anomalies that occur during the dialogue by attempting
to instantiate an unspecified attribute, constraining an attribute for which multiple values have been specified, or
correcting an invalid assumption in the case of invalid
4In practice, this is the preferred initiative holder since practical
reasons may prevent the dialogue participant from actually holding the
initiative. For instance, if having task initiative dictates inclusion of
additional helpful information, this can only be realized if MIMIC's
knowledge base provides such information.
100
Cue Class Cue BPA
Discourse TakeOverTask mt—tot({speaker)) = 0.35; mt—t0t(0) = 0.65
Analytical NoNewInfo mt—nm({hearer }) = 0.35; Int-nnz(e) = 0.65
InvalidAction nit—sa({hearer}) = 0.35; mt_,.(0) = 0.65
InvalidActionResolved mt--zar ((hearer)) = 0.35; mt-2.,(0) = 0.65
AmbiguousAction mt_aa ({hearer}) = 0.35; int—..(e) --= 0.65
AmbiguousActionResolved Trtt—aar ({speaker}) = 0.35; int—.(0) = 0.65
(a) Task Initiative
Cue Class Cue BPA
Discourse TakeOverTask md—tot({speaker}) = 0.35; Md-t0(e) = 0.65
Analytical NoNewInfo Ind-nnt ghear = 0.35; md—nn, (0) = 0.65
InvalidAction ind_ta({hearer}) = 0.7; 7nd-in(e) = 0.3
InvalidActionResolved rnd,({hearer}) = 0.7; md—,a, (e) = 0.3
AmbiguousAction md—aa({hearer}) = 0.7; md—aa (C) = 0.3
AmbiguousActionResolved md—aar({speakerl) = 0.7; md—.(0) = 0.3
(b) Dialogue Initiative
Figure 3: Cues and BPAs for Modeling Initiative in MIMIC
Seleet-Goal(SemRep):
If AmbiguousAction detected
ambiguous-attr get-ambiguous(SemRep)
1* get name of ambiguous attribute *1
If (number-values(ambiguous-attr) == 0)
/* attribute unspecified */
Instantiate(ambiguous-attr)
Else /* more than one value specified
Constrain(ambiguous-attr)
Else if InvalidAction detected
ProvideNegativeAnswer(SemRep)
Else 1* well-formed query */
answer 4-- database-query(SemRep)
ProvideAnswer(answer)
Figure 4: Goal Selection Algorithm
user queries (steps 1-8)5 (van Beek et al., 1993; Raskutti
and Zukerman, 1993; Qu and Beale, 1999), and 2) providing answers to well-formed queries (steps 9-11).
3.2.3 Strategy Selection
Previous work has argued that initiative affects the degree of control an agent has in the dialogue interaction
(Whittaker and Stenton, 1988; Walker and Whittaker,
1990; Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998). Thus, a cooperative system may adopt different strategies to achieve the
same goal depending on the initiative distribution. Since
task initiative models contribution to domain/problemsolving goals, while dialogue initiative affects the cur
5An alternative strategy to step (4) is to perform a database lookup
based on the ambiguous query and summarize the results (Litman et
al., 1998), which we leave for future work.
rent discourse goal, we developed alternative strategies
for achieving the goals in Figure 4 based on initiative
distribution, as shown in Table 1.
The strategies employed when MIMIC has only dialogue initiative are similar to the mixed initiative dialogue strategies employed by many existing spoken dialogue systems (e.g., (Bennacef et at., 1996; Stent et
al., 1999)). To instantiate an attribute, MIMIC adopts
the InfoSeek dialogue act to solicit the missing information. In contrast, when MIMIC has both initiatives, it
plays a more active role by presenting the user with additional information comprising valid instantiations of the
attribute (GiveOptions). Given an invalid query, MIMIC
notifies the user of the failed query and provides an openended prompt when it only has dialogue initiative. When
MIMIC has both initiatives, however, in addition to NotifyFailure, it suggests an alternative close to the user's
original query and provides a limited prompt. Finally,
when MIMIC has neither initiative, it simply adopts NotifyFailure, allowing the user to determine the next discourse goal.
3.3 Utterance Generation
MIMIC employs a simple template-driven utterance generation approach. Templates are associated with dialogue
acts as shown in Table 2.6 The generation component receives from the dialogue manager the selected dialogue
acts and the parameters needed to instantiate the templates. It then generates the system response, which is
sent to the TTS module for spoken output synthesis.
61n most cases, there is a one-to-one-mapping between dialogue
acts and templates. The exceptions are Answer, NotifyFailure, and
SuggestAltemative, whose templates vary based on the question type.
101
Task + Dialogue Dialogue None
Constrain Clarify Clarify Acknowledge
Instantiate GiveOptions InfoSeek Acknowledge
InfoSeek
ProvideAnswer Answer Answer Answer
LimitedPrompt OpenPrompt
ProvideNegativeAnswer NotifyFailure NotifyFailure NotifyFailure
SuggestAlternative OpenPrompt
LimitedPrompt
Table 1: Strategy Selection Based on Goal and Initiative Distribution
Dialogue Act
Clarify
Acknowledge
GiveOptions
InfoSeek
Answer
OpenPrompt
LimitedPrompt
NotifyFailure
SuggestAlternative
Template
&quot;Did you say < valuer > . . ., or < value?, >T&quot;
&quot;Uh-huh.&quot;
&quot;Choices for < attribute > are < valuei > < value. >.&quot;
&quot;What < attribute > would you like?&quot;
E.g., &quot;< movie > is playing at < theater > at < timei > . . . < timen >.&quot;
&quot;Can I help you with anything else?&quot;
&quot;Please say the name of the movie or theater or town you would like information about.&quot;
E.g., &quot;< movie > is not playing at < theater > .
E.g., &quot;< movie > is playing at < alternativetheater > at < timer > < timen >.&quot;
Table 2: Mappings Between Dialogue Acts and Utterance Templates
4 Examples
To illustrate MIMIC's adaptation capabilities, we return
to the dialogue in Figure 1, which is repeated in Figure 5
and annotated with the cues detected in each user turn
(in boldfaced italics) and the dialogue acts employed for
response generation in each system turn (in boldface).
The bpas representing the initiative distribution for utterance (3) are the initial bpas, which, based on MIMIC's
role as an information provider, are
Int—(3) ({S}) = 0.3, mt—(3)({U}) = 0.7;
md—(3)({S}) = 0.6, md—(3) = 0.4.
The cue AmbiguousAction is detected in utterance (3)
because the mandatory attribute theater was not specified
and cannot be inferred (since the town of Montclair has
multiple theaters). The bpas representing its effect are
instantiated as follows (Figure 3):
mt—aa({S}) = 0.35, mt_aa(0) = 0.65;
md—aa({S}) = 0.7, md_aa(0) = 0.3.
Combining the current bpas with the effects of the observed cue, we obtain the following new bpas:
mt—(4)({S}) = 0.4, mt—(4)(IUD = 0.6;
md—(4)({S}) = 0.83, md—(4)({U}) = 0.17.
The updated bpas indicate that MIMIC should have dialogue but not task initiative when attempting to resolve
the detected ambiguity in utterance (4).
MIMIC selects Instantiate as its goal to be achieved
(Figure 4), which, based on the initiative distribution,
leads it to select the InfoSeek action (Table 1) and generate the query &quot;What theater would you like?&quot;
The user's response in (5) again triggers AmbiguousAction, as well as NoNewInfo since the semantic representations of (3) and (5) are identical, given the dialogue
context. When the effects of these cues are taken into
account, we have the following initiative distribution for
utterance (6):
= 0.62, mg—(6)({U}) = 0.38;
md_(6)({S}) = 0.96, md—(6)({U}) = 0.04.
Although Instantiate is again selected as the goal,
MIMIC now has both task and dialogue initiatives; thus
it selects both GiveOptions and InfoSeek to achieve this
goal and generates utterances (6) and (7). The additional information, in the form of valid theater choices,
helps the user provide the missing value in (8), allowing MIMIC to answer the query in (9) and prompt for
the next query. However, despite the limited prompt,
the user provides a well-formed query in (11), triggering TakeOverTask. Thus, MIMIC answers the query and
switches to an open-ended prompt in (13), relinquishing
task initiative to the user.
In addition to its automatic adaptation capabilities, another advantage of MIMIC is the ease of modifying its
adaptation behavior, enabled by the decoupling of the
initiative module from the goal and strategy selection
processes. For instance, a system-initiative version of
MIMIC can be achieved by setting the initial bpas as follows:
Mt—initial ({S}) = 1;
Md—initial({S}) = 1.
102
Sr Hello, this is MIMIC, the movie information system.
U: How can I help you?
What time is Analyze This playing in Montclair?
[what time is analyze this playing in montclair] [AmbiguousAction]
Sr What theater would you like? [InfoSeek]
U: Montclair.
[montclair] [AmbiguousAction,NoNewInfo]
Sr Choices for theater are Wellmont theater and Clearviews Screening Zone [GiveOptions]
What theater would you like? [InfoSeek]
U: Clearviews Screening Zone.
[um movie screening zone] [AmbiguousActionResolved]
Sr Analyze This is playing at Clearviews Screening Zone in Montclair at 1:15pm, [Answer]
4:10pm, and 6:30pm.
Please say the name of the movie or theater or town you would like information [LimitedPrompt]
about.
U: What time is Analyze This playing at the Wellmont theater?
[what time is analyze this playing at the wellmont theater] [TakeOverTask]
Sr Analyze this is playing at Wellmont theater in Montclair at 3:15pm, 5:45pm, [Answer]
8:20pm, and 10:10pm.
Can I help you with anything else? [OpenPrompt]
Figure 5: Annotated Dialogue Shown in Figure 1
This is because in the Dempster-Shafer theory, if the
initial bpas or the bpas for a cue provide definite evidence for drawing a certain conclusion, then no subsequent cue has any effect on changing that conclusion.
Thus, MIMIC will retain both initiatives throughout the
dialogue. Alternatively, versions of MIMIC with different adaptation behavior can be achieved by tailoring the
initial bpas and/or the bpas for each cue based on the application. For instance, for an electronic sales agent, the
effect of InvalidAction can be increased so that when the
user orders an out-of-stock item, the system will always
take over task initiative and suggest an alternative item.
5 System Evaluation
We conducted two experiments to evaluate MIMIC's automatic adaptation capabilities. We compared MIMIC
with two control systems: MIMIC-SI, a system-initiative
version of MIMIC in which the system retains both initiatives throughout the dialogue, and MIMIC-MI, a nonadaptive mixed-initiative version of MIMIC that resembles the behavior of many existing dialogue systems. In
this section we summarize these experiments and their
results. A companion paper describes the evaluation process and results in further detail (Chu-Carroll and Nickerson, 2000).
Each experiment involved eight users interacting with
MIMIC and MIMIC-SI or MIMIC-MI to perform a set of
tasks, each requiring the user to obtain specific movie information. User satisfaction was assessed by asking the
subjects to fill out a questionnaire after interacting with
each version of the system. Furthermore, a number of
performance features, largely based on the PARADISE
dialogue evaluation scheme (Walker et al., 1997), were
automatically logged, derived, or manually annotated. In
addition, we logged the cues automatically detected in
each user utterance, as well as the initiative distribution
for each turn and the dialogue acts selected to generate
each system response.
The features gathered from the dialogue interactions
were analyzed along three dimensions: system performance, discourse features (in terms of characteristics
of the resulting dialogues, such as the cues detected in
user utterances), and initiative distribution. Our results
show that MIMIC's adaptation capabilities 1) led to better system performance in terms of user satisfaction, dialogue efficiency (shorter dialogues), and dialogue quality
(fewer ASR timeouts), and 2) better matched user expectations (by giving up task initiative when the user intends
to have control of the dialogue interaction) and more efficiently resolved dialogue anomalies (by taking over task
initiative to provide guidance when no progress is made
in the dialogue, or to constrain user utterances when ASR
performance is poor).
6 Conclusions
In this paper, we discussed MIMIC, an adaptive mixedinitiative spoken dialogue system. MIMIC's automatic
adaptation capabilities allow it to employ appropriate
strategies based on the cumulative effect of information
dynamically extracted from user utterances during dialogue interactions, enabling MIMIC to provide more cooperative and satisfactory responses than existing nonadaptive systems. Furthermore, MIMIC was implemented as a general framework for information query
systems by decoupling its initiative module from the
goal selection process, while allowing the outcome of
both processes to jointly determine the response strategies employed. This feature enables easy modification to
MIMIC's adaptation behavior, thus allowing the framework to be used for rapid development and comparisons
103
of experimental prototypes of spoken dialogue systems.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Egbert Ammicht, Antoine Saad, Qiru Zhou, Wolfgang Reich], and Stefan
Ortmanns for their help on system integration and on
ASR/telephony server development, Jill Nickerson for
conducting the evaluation experiments, and Bob Carpenter, Diane Litman, Christine Nakatani, and Jill Nickerson
for their comments on an earlier draft of this paper.
References
S. Bennacef, L. Devillers, S. Rosset, and L. Lamel.
1996. Dialog in the RAILTEL telephone-based system. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Spoken Language Processing.
Jennifer Chu-Carroll and Michael K. Brown. 1998. An
evidential model for tracking initiative in collaborative dialogue interactions. User Modeling and UserAdapted Interaction, 8(3-4):215-253.
Jennifer Chu-Carroll and Bob Carpenter. 1999. Vectorbased natural language call routing. Computational
Linguistics, 25(3):361-388.
Jennifer Chu-Carroll and Jill S. Nickerson. 2000. Evaluating automatic dialogue strategy adaptation for a spoken dialogue system. In Proceedings of the 1st Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics. To appear.
Jean Gordon and Edward H. Shortliffe. 1984. The
Dempster-Shafer theory of evidence. In Bruce
Buchanan and Edward Shortliffe, editors, Rule-Based
Expert Systems: The MYCIN Experiments of the
Stanford Heuristic Programming Project, chapter 13,
pages 272-292. Addison-Wesley.
Lori Lamel. 1998. Spoken language dialog system development and evaluation at LIMSI. In Proceedings
of the International Symposium on Spoken Dialogue,
pages 9-17.
Diane J. Litman and Shimei Pan. 1999. Empirically
evaluating an adaptable spoken dialogue system. In
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on
User Modeling, pages 55-64.
Diane J. Litman, Shimei Pan, and Marilyn A. Walker.
1998. Evaluating response strategies in a web-based
spoken dialogue agent. In Proceedings of the 36th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 780-786.
Christine H. Nakatani and Jennifer Chu-Carroll. 2000.
Using dialogue representations for concept-to-speech
generation. In Proceedings of the ANLP-NAACL
Workshop on Conversational Systems.
Stefan Ortmanns, Wolfgang Reichl, and Wu Chou. 1999.
An efficient decoding method for real time speech
recognition. In Proceedings of the 5th European Conference on Speech Communication and Technology.
Yan Qu and Steve Beale. 1999. A constraint-based
model for cooperative response generation in information dialogues. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Bhavani Raskutti and Ingrid Zukerman. 1993. Eliciting additional information during cooperative consultations. In Proceedings of the 15th Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society.
Wolfgang Reichl and Wu. Chou. 1998. Decision tree
state tying based on segmental clustering for acoustic
modeling. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing.
Gerald Salton. 1971. The SMART Retrieval System.
Prentice Hall, Inc.
Stephanie Seneff, James Glass, David Goddeau, David
Goodine, Lynette Hirschman, Hong Leung, Michael
Phillips, Joseph Polifroni, and Victor Zue. 1991. Development and preliminary evaluation of the MIT
ATIS system. In Proceedings of the DARPA Speech
and Natural Language Workshop, pages 88-93.
Glenn Shafer. 1976. A Mathematical Theory of Evidence. Princeton University Press.
Richard Sproat, editor. 1998. Multilingual Text-toSpeech Synthesis: The Bell Labs Approach. Kluwer,
Boston, MA.
Amanda Stent, John Dowding, Jean Mark Gawron, Elizabeth Owen Bratt, and Robert Moore. 1999. The
CommandTalk spoken dialogue system. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 183-190.
Peter van Beek, Robin Cohen, and Ken Schmidt. 1993.
From plan critiquing to clarification dialogue for cooperative response generation. Computational Intelligence, 9 (2):132-154 .
Marilyn Walker and Steve Whittaker. 1990. Mixed initiative in dialogue: An investigation into discourse
segmentation. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 70-78.
Marilyn A. Walker, Diane J. Litman, Candance A.
Kamm, and Alicia Abella. 1997. PARADISE: A
framework for evaluating spoken dialogue agents. In
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 271-280.
Steve Whittaker and Phil Stenton. 1988. Cues and control in expert-client dialogues. In Proceedings of the
26th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 123-130.
Qiru Zhou, Chin-Hui Lee, Wu Chou, and Andrew Pargellis. 1997. Speech technology integration and research
platform: A system study. In Proceedings of the 5th
European Conference on Speech Communication and
Technology.
104
MIMIC: An Adaptive Mixed Initiative Spoken Dialogue System for Information Queries
Jennifer Chu-Carroll
Lucent Technologies Bell Laboratories
600 Mountain Avenue Murray Hill, NJ 07974, U.S.A.
jencc@research.bell-labs.com
This paper describes MIMIC, an adaptive mixed initiative spoken dialogue system that provides movie showtime information. MIMIC improves upon previous dialogue systems in two respects. First, it employs initiative-oriented strategy adaptation to automatically adapt response generation strategies based on the cumulative effect of information dynamically extracted from user utterances during the dialogue. Second, MIMIC's dialogue management architecture decouples its initiative module from the goal and response strategy selection processes, providing a general framework for developing spoken dialogue systems with different adaptation behavior.
S Bennacef
L Devillers
S Rosset
L Lamel
Dialog in the RAILTEL telephone-based system.
1996
In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Spoken Language Processing.
Bennacef, Devillers, Rosset, Lamel, 1996
S. Bennacef, L. Devillers, S. Rosset, and L. Lamel. 1996. Dialog in the RAILTEL telephone-based system. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Spoken Language Processing.
Jennifer Chu-Carroll
Michael K Brown
An evidential model for tracking initiative in collaborative dialogue interactions. User Modeling and UserAdapted Interaction,
1998
8--3
mains. Most existing systems employ dialogue strategies pre-specified during the design phase of the dialogue manager without taking into account characteristics of actual dialogue interactions. More specifically, mixed initiative systems typically employ rules that specify conditions (generally based on local dialogue context) under which initiative may shift from one agent to the other. Previous research, on the other hand, has shown that changes in initiative strategies in human-human dialogues can be dynamically modeled in terms of characteristics of the user and of the on-going dialogue (Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998) and that adaptability of initiative strategies in dialogue systems leads to better system performance (Litman and Pan, 1999). However, no previous dialogue system takes into account these dialogue characteristics or allows for initiative-oriented adaptation of dialogue strategies. In this paper, we describe MIMIC, a voice-enabled telephone-based dialogue system that provides movie showtime information, emphasizing its dialogue management aspects. MIMIC improves upon previous systems along two dimensions. First, MIMIC automatically adapts dialogue strategies based on participant roles, charact
 an excerpt from a dialogue between MIMIC and an actual user where the user is attempting to find the times at which the movie Analyze This playing at theaters in Montclair. S and U indicate system and user utterances, respectively, and the italicized utterances are the output of our automatic speech recognizer. In addition, each system turn is annotated with its task and dialogue initiative holders, where task initiative tracks the lead in the process toward achieving the dialogue participants' domain goal, while dialogue initiative models the lead in determining the current discourse focus (Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998). In our information query application domain, the system has task (and thus dialogue) initiative if its utterances provide helpful guidance toward achieving the user's domain goal, as in utterances (6) and (7) where MIMIC provided valid response choices to its query intending to solicit a theater name, while the system has 97 dialogue but not task initiative if its utterances only specify the current discourse goal, as in utterance (4).1 This dialogue illustrates several features of our adaptive mixed initiative dialogue manager. First, MIMIC automatically adapted the initiative distribution 
terances (1) and (13)). In the next section, we briefly review a framework for dynamic initiative modeling. In Section 3, we discuss how this framework was incorporated into the dialogue management component of a spoken dialogue system to allow for automatic adaptation of dialogue strategies. Finally, we outline experiments evaluating the resulting system and show that MIMIC's automatic adaptation capabilities resulted in better system performance. 2.2 An Evidential Framework for Modeling Initiative In previous work, we proposed a framework for modeling initiative during dialogue interaction (Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998). This framework predicts task and dialogue initiative holders on a turn-by-turn basis in humanhuman dialogues based on participant roles (such as each dialogue agent's level of expertise and the role that she plays in the application domain), cues observed in the current dialogue turn, and dialogue history. More specifically, we utilize the Dempster-Shafer theory (Shafer, 1976; Gordon and Shortliffe, 1984), and represent the current initiative distribution as two basic probability assignments (bpas) which indicate the amount of support for each dialogue participant having the task and dialogu
stribution, a set of dialogue acts that MIMIC will adopt in its attempt to realize the selected goal. 3.2.1 Initiative Modeling MIMIC's initiative module determines the task and dialogue initiative holders for each system turn in order to enable dynamic strategy adaptation. It automatically detects cues triggered during the current user turn, and combines the effects of these cues with the current initiative distribution to determine the initiative holders for the system's turn. Cue Detection The cues and the bpas representing their effects are largely based on a subset of those described in (Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998),3 as shown in Figures 3(a) and 3(b). Figure 3(a) shows that observation of TakeOverTask supports a task initiative shift to the speaker to the degree .35. The remaining support is assigned to 0, the set of all possible conclusions (i.e., {speaker,hearer}), indicating that to the degree .65, observation of this cue does not commit to identifying which dialogue participant should have task initiative in the next dialogue turn. The cues used in MIMIC are classified into two categories, discourse cues and analytical cues, based on the types of knowledge needed to detect them: I. Discourse cues, w
se /* more than one value specified Constrain(ambiguous-attr) Else if InvalidAction detected ProvideNegativeAnswer(SemRep) Else 1* well-formed query */ answer 4-- database-query(SemRep) ProvideAnswer(answer) Figure 4: Goal Selection Algorithm user queries (steps 1-8)5 (van Beek et al., 1993; Raskutti and Zukerman, 1993; Qu and Beale, 1999), and 2) providing answers to well-formed queries (steps 9-11). 3.2.3 Strategy Selection Previous work has argued that initiative affects the degree of control an agent has in the dialogue interaction (Whittaker and Stenton, 1988; Walker and Whittaker, 1990; Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998). Thus, a cooperative system may adopt different strategies to achieve the same goal depending on the initiative distribution. Since task initiative models contribution to domain/problemsolving goals, while dialogue initiative affects the cur5An alternative strategy to step (4) is to perform a database lookup based on the ambiguous query and summarize the results (Litman et al., 1998), which we leave for future work. rent discourse goal, we developed alternative strategies for achieving the goals in Figure 4 based on initiative distribution, as shown in Table 1. The strategies employed when MI
Chu-Carroll, Brown, 1998
Jennifer Chu-Carroll and Michael K. Brown. 1998. An evidential model for tracking initiative in collaborative dialogue interactions. User Modeling and UserAdapted Interaction, 8(3-4):215-253.
Jennifer Chu-Carroll
Bob Carpenter
1999
Vectorbased natural language call routing. Computational Linguistics,
25--3
u-Carroll, 2000) for how MIMIC's dialoguelevel knowledge is used to override default prosodic assignments for concept-to-speech generation. Question-Type: When Movie: Analyze This Theater: null Town: Montclair (a) Semantic Representation Question-Type: When Movie: mandatory Theater: mandatory Town: optional (b) Task Specification Figure 2: Semantic Representation and Task Specification in Montclair?&quot; MIMIC's semantic representation is constructed by first extracting, for each attribute, a set of keywords from the user utterance. Using a vector-based topic identification process (Salton, 1971; Chu-Carroll and Carpenter, 1999), these keywords are used to determine a set of likely values (including null) for that attribute. Next, the utterance is interpreted with respect to the dialogue history and the system's domain knowledge. This allows MIMIC to handle elliptical sentences and anaphoric references, as well as automatically infer missing values and detect inconsistencies in the current representation. This semantic representation allows for decoupling of domain-dependent task specifications and domain99 independent dialogue management strategies. Each query type is specified by a template indicating, for each att
Chu-Carroll, Carpenter, 1999
Jennifer Chu-Carroll and Bob Carpenter. 1999. Vectorbased natural language call routing. Computational Linguistics, 25(3):361-388.
Jennifer Chu-Carroll
Jill S Nickerson
Evaluating automatic dialogue strategy adaptation for a spoken dialogue system.
2000
In Proceedings of the 1st Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
To appear.
ys take over task initiative and suggest an alternative item. 5 System Evaluation We conducted two experiments to evaluate MIMIC's automatic adaptation capabilities. We compared MIMIC with two control systems: MIMIC-SI, a system-initiative version of MIMIC in which the system retains both initiatives throughout the dialogue, and MIMIC-MI, a nonadaptive mixed-initiative version of MIMIC that resembles the behavior of many existing dialogue systems. In this section we summarize these experiments and their results. A companion paper describes the evaluation process and results in further detail (Chu-Carroll and Nickerson, 2000). Each experiment involved eight users interacting with MIMIC and MIMIC-SI or MIMIC-MI to perform a set of tasks, each requiring the user to obtain specific movie information. User satisfaction was assessed by asking the subjects to fill out a questionnaire after interacting with each version of the system. Furthermore, a number of performance features, largely based on the PARADISE dialogue evaluation scheme (Walker et al., 1997), were automatically logged, derived, or manually annotated. In addition, we logged the cues automatically detected in each user utterance, as well as the initiative 
Chu-Carroll, Nickerson, 2000
Jennifer Chu-Carroll and Jill S. Nickerson. 2000. Evaluating automatic dialogue strategy adaptation for a spoken dialogue system. In Proceedings of the 1st Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics. To appear.
Jean Gordon
Edward H Shortliffe
The Dempster-Shafer theory of evidence.
1984
Rule-Based Expert Systems: The MYCIN Experiments of the Stanford Heuristic Programming Project, chapter 13,
272--292
In Bruce Buchanan and Edward Shortliffe, editors,
Addison-Wesley.
ies resulted in better system performance. 2.2 An Evidential Framework for Modeling Initiative In previous work, we proposed a framework for modeling initiative during dialogue interaction (Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998). This framework predicts task and dialogue initiative holders on a turn-by-turn basis in humanhuman dialogues based on participant roles (such as each dialogue agent's level of expertise and the role that she plays in the application domain), cues observed in the current dialogue turn, and dialogue history. More specifically, we utilize the Dempster-Shafer theory (Shafer, 1976; Gordon and Shortliffe, 1984), and represent the current initiative distribution as two basic probability assignments (bpas) which indicate the amount of support for each dialogue participant having the task and dialogue initiatives. For instance, the bpa mt—cur ({S)) = 'Although the dialogues we collected in our experiments (Section 5) include cases in which MIMIC has neither initiative, such cases are rare in this application domain, and will not be discussed further in this paper. 0.3, Mt—cur({U}) = 0.7 indicates that, with all evidence taken into account, there is more support (to the degree 0.7) for the user having t
ntially prompting the hearer to take over initiative to resolve the detected ambiguity, etc. The effects that each cue has on changing the current bpas are also represented as bpas, which were determined by an iterative training procedure using a corpus of transcribed dialogues where each turn was annotated with the task/dialogue initiative holders and the observed cues. The bpas for the next turn are computed by combining the bpas representing the current initiative distribution and the bpas representing the effects of cues observed during the current turn, using Dempster's combination rule (Gordon and Shortliffe, 1984). The task and dialogue initiative holders are then predicted based on the new bpas. This framework was evaluated using annotated dialogues from four task-oriented domains, achieving, on average, a correct prediction rate of 97% and 88% for task and dialogue initiative holders, respectively. In Section 3.2, we discuss how this predictive model is converted into a generative model by enabling the system to automatically detect cues that were previously labelled manually. We further discuss how the model is used by the dialogue manager for dynamic dialogue strategy adaptation. 3 MIMIC: Mixed Ini
well-formed, triggered when a mandatory attribute is unspecified or when more than one value is specified for an attribute. • AmbiguousActionResolved, triggered when the attribute in question is uniquely instantiated. Computing Initiative Distribution To determine the initiative distribution, the bpas representing the effects of cues detected in the current user utterance are instantiated (i.e., speaker/hearer in Figure 3 are instantiated as system/user accordingly). These effects are then interpreted with respect to the current initiative distribution by applying Dempster's combination rule (Gordon and Shortliffe, 1984) to the bpas representing the current initiative distribution and the instantiated bpas. This results in two new bpas representing the task and dialogue initiative distributions for the system's turn. The dialogue participant with the greater degree of support for having the task/dialogue initiative in these bpas is the task/dialogue initiative holder for the system's turn4 (see Section 4 for an example). 3.2.2 Goal Selection The goal selection module selects a goal that MIMIC attempts to achieve in its response by utilizing information from analytical cue detection as shown in Figure 4. MIMIC
Gordon, Shortliffe, 1984
Jean Gordon and Edward H. Shortliffe. 1984. The Dempster-Shafer theory of evidence. In Bruce Buchanan and Edward Shortliffe, editors, Rule-Based Expert Systems: The MYCIN Experiments of the Stanford Heuristic Programming Project, chapter 13, pages 272-292. Addison-Wesley.
Lori Lamel
Spoken language dialog system development and evaluation at LIMSI.
1998
In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Spoken Dialogue,
9--17
etail in the rest of this section. 4. Text-to-speech engine: the TTS system receives the word string comprising the system's response from the dialogue component and converts the text into speech for output over the telephone. We used the Bell Labs TTS system (Sproat, 1998), which in addition to converting plain text into speech, accepts text strings annotated to override default pitch height, accent placement, speaking rate, etc.2 3.1 Semantic Interpretation MIMIC utilizes a non-recursive frame-based semantic representation commonly used in spoken dialogue systems (e.g. (Seneff et al., 1991; Lamel, 1998)), which represents an utterance as a set of attribute-value pairs. Figure 2(a) shows the frame-based semantic representation for the utterance &quot;What time is Analyze This playing 2 See (Nakatani and Chu-Carroll, 2000) for how MIMIC's dialoguelevel knowledge is used to override default prosodic assignments for concept-to-speech generation. Question-Type: When Movie: Analyze This Theater: null Town: Montclair (a) Semantic Representation Question-Type: When Movie: mandatory Theater: mandatory Town: optional (b) Task Specification Figure 2: Semantic Representation and Task Specification in Montcla
Lamel, 1998
Lori Lamel. 1998. Spoken language dialog system development and evaluation at LIMSI. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Spoken Dialogue, pages 9-17.
Diane J Litman
Shimei Pan
Empirically evaluating an adaptable spoken dialogue system.
1999
In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on User Modeling,
55--64
 into account characteristics of actual dialogue interactions. More specifically, mixed initiative systems typically employ rules that specify conditions (generally based on local dialogue context) under which initiative may shift from one agent to the other. Previous research, on the other hand, has shown that changes in initiative strategies in human-human dialogues can be dynamically modeled in terms of characteristics of the user and of the on-going dialogue (Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998) and that adaptability of initiative strategies in dialogue systems leads to better system performance (Litman and Pan, 1999). However, no previous dialogue system takes into account these dialogue characteristics or allows for initiative-oriented adaptation of dialogue strategies. In this paper, we describe MIMIC, a voice-enabled telephone-based dialogue system that provides movie showtime information, emphasizing its dialogue management aspects. MIMIC improves upon previous systems along two dimensions. First, MIMIC automatically adapts dialogue strategies based on participant roles, characteristics of the current utterance, and dialogue history. This automatic adaptation allows appropriate dialogue strategies to 
Litman, Pan, 1999
Diane J. Litman and Shimei Pan. 1999. Empirically evaluating an adaptable spoken dialogue system. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on User Modeling, pages 55-64.
Diane J Litman
Shimei Pan
Marilyn A Walker
Evaluating response strategies in a web-based spoken dialogue agent.
1998
In Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
780--786
ps 9-11). 3.2.3 Strategy Selection Previous work has argued that initiative affects the degree of control an agent has in the dialogue interaction (Whittaker and Stenton, 1988; Walker and Whittaker, 1990; Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998). Thus, a cooperative system may adopt different strategies to achieve the same goal depending on the initiative distribution. Since task initiative models contribution to domain/problemsolving goals, while dialogue initiative affects the cur5An alternative strategy to step (4) is to perform a database lookup based on the ambiguous query and summarize the results (Litman et al., 1998), which we leave for future work. rent discourse goal, we developed alternative strategies for achieving the goals in Figure 4 based on initiative distribution, as shown in Table 1. The strategies employed when MIMIC has only dialogue initiative are similar to the mixed initiative dialogue strategies employed by many existing spoken dialogue systems (e.g., (Bennacef et at., 1996; Stent et al., 1999)). To instantiate an attribute, MIMIC adopts the InfoSeek dialogue act to solicit the missing information. In contrast, when MIMIC has both initiatives, it plays a more active role by presenting the
Litman, Pan, Walker, 1998
Diane J. Litman, Shimei Pan, and Marilyn A. Walker. 1998. Evaluating response strategies in a web-based spoken dialogue agent. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 780-786.
Christine H Nakatani
Jennifer Chu-Carroll
Using dialogue representations for concept-to-speech generation.
2000
In Proceedings of the ANLP-NAACL Workshop on Conversational Systems.
r output over the telephone. We used the Bell Labs TTS system (Sproat, 1998), which in addition to converting plain text into speech, accepts text strings annotated to override default pitch height, accent placement, speaking rate, etc.2 3.1 Semantic Interpretation MIMIC utilizes a non-recursive frame-based semantic representation commonly used in spoken dialogue systems (e.g. (Seneff et al., 1991; Lamel, 1998)), which represents an utterance as a set of attribute-value pairs. Figure 2(a) shows the frame-based semantic representation for the utterance &quot;What time is Analyze This playing 2 See (Nakatani and Chu-Carroll, 2000) for how MIMIC's dialoguelevel knowledge is used to override default prosodic assignments for concept-to-speech generation. Question-Type: When Movie: Analyze This Theater: null Town: Montclair (a) Semantic Representation Question-Type: When Movie: mandatory Theater: mandatory Town: optional (b) Task Specification Figure 2: Semantic Representation and Task Specification in Montclair?&quot; MIMIC's semantic representation is constructed by first extracting, for each attribute, a set of keywords from the user utterance. Using a vector-based topic identification process (Salton, 1971; Chu-Carroll and 
Nakatani, Chu-Carroll, 2000
Christine H. Nakatani and Jennifer Chu-Carroll. 2000. Using dialogue representations for concept-to-speech generation. In Proceedings of the ANLP-NAACL Workshop on Conversational Systems.
Stefan Ortmanns
Wolfgang Reichl
Wu Chou
An efficient decoding method for real time speech recognition.
1999
In Proceedings of the 5th European Conference on Speech Communication and Technology.
vie Information Consultant MIMIC is a telephone-based dialogue system that provides movie showtime information. It consists of the following main components, implemented on a distributed, client-server architecture (Zhou et al., 1997): 1. Telephony server: this component detects rings and hang-ups, and enables streaming of audio data on channels of a telephony board. 2. Speech recognizer: the recognizer receives audio data from the telephony server and generates the word string hypothesis that best matches the audio input. We used the Lucent Automatic Speech Recognizer (Reichl and Chou, 1998; Ortmanns et al., 1999), configured to use class-based probabilistic ngram language models to allow for rapid updates of movie/theater/town names. 98 Utterance Task Dialogue Initiative Initiative S: Hello, this is MIMIC, the movie information system. User System How can I help you? U: What time is Analyze This playing in Montclair? [what time is analyze this playing in montclair] S: What theater would you like? User System U: Montclair. [montclair] S: Choices for theater are Wellmont Theater and Clearviews Screening Zone. System System What theater would you like? U: Clearviews Screening Zone. [urn movie screening z
Ortmanns, Reichl, Chou, 1999
Stefan Ortmanns, Wolfgang Reichl, and Wu Chou. 1999. An efficient decoding method for real time speech recognition. In Proceedings of the 5th European Conference on Speech Communication and Technology.
Yan Qu
Steve Beale
A constraint-based model for cooperative response generation in information dialogues.
1999
In Proceedings of the Sixteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
igure 3: Cues and BPAs for Modeling Initiative in MIMIC Seleet-Goal(SemRep): If AmbiguousAction detected ambiguous-attr get-ambiguous(SemRep) 1* get name of ambiguous attribute *1 If (number-values(ambiguous-attr) == 0) /* attribute unspecified */ Instantiate(ambiguous-attr) Else /* more than one value specified Constrain(ambiguous-attr) Else if InvalidAction detected ProvideNegativeAnswer(SemRep) Else 1* well-formed query */ answer 4-- database-query(SemRep) ProvideAnswer(answer) Figure 4: Goal Selection Algorithm user queries (steps 1-8)5 (van Beek et al., 1993; Raskutti and Zukerman, 1993; Qu and Beale, 1999), and 2) providing answers to well-formed queries (steps 9-11). 3.2.3 Strategy Selection Previous work has argued that initiative affects the degree of control an agent has in the dialogue interaction (Whittaker and Stenton, 1988; Walker and Whittaker, 1990; Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998). Thus, a cooperative system may adopt different strategies to achieve the same goal depending on the initiative distribution. Since task initiative models contribution to domain/problemsolving goals, while dialogue initiative affects the cur5An alternative strategy to step (4) is to perform a database lookup ba
Qu, Beale, 1999
Yan Qu and Steve Beale. 1999. A constraint-based model for cooperative response generation in information dialogues. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Bhavani Raskutti
Ingrid Zukerman
Eliciting additional information during cooperative consultations.
1993
In Proceedings of the 15th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
0.3 (b) Dialogue Initiative Figure 3: Cues and BPAs for Modeling Initiative in MIMIC Seleet-Goal(SemRep): If AmbiguousAction detected ambiguous-attr get-ambiguous(SemRep) 1* get name of ambiguous attribute *1 If (number-values(ambiguous-attr) == 0) /* attribute unspecified */ Instantiate(ambiguous-attr) Else /* more than one value specified Constrain(ambiguous-attr) Else if InvalidAction detected ProvideNegativeAnswer(SemRep) Else 1* well-formed query */ answer 4-- database-query(SemRep) ProvideAnswer(answer) Figure 4: Goal Selection Algorithm user queries (steps 1-8)5 (van Beek et al., 1993; Raskutti and Zukerman, 1993; Qu and Beale, 1999), and 2) providing answers to well-formed queries (steps 9-11). 3.2.3 Strategy Selection Previous work has argued that initiative affects the degree of control an agent has in the dialogue interaction (Whittaker and Stenton, 1988; Walker and Whittaker, 1990; Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998). Thus, a cooperative system may adopt different strategies to achieve the same goal depending on the initiative distribution. Since task initiative models contribution to domain/problemsolving goals, while dialogue initiative affects the cur5An alternative strategy to step (4) is to perform
Raskutti, Zukerman, 1993
Bhavani Raskutti and Ingrid Zukerman. 1993. Eliciting additional information during cooperative consultations. In Proceedings of the 15th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Chou
Decision tree state tying based on segmental clustering for acoustic modeling.
1998
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing.
nitiative Movie Information Consultant MIMIC is a telephone-based dialogue system that provides movie showtime information. It consists of the following main components, implemented on a distributed, client-server architecture (Zhou et al., 1997): 1. Telephony server: this component detects rings and hang-ups, and enables streaming of audio data on channels of a telephony board. 2. Speech recognizer: the recognizer receives audio data from the telephony server and generates the word string hypothesis that best matches the audio input. We used the Lucent Automatic Speech Recognizer (Reichl and Chou, 1998; Ortmanns et al., 1999), configured to use class-based probabilistic ngram language models to allow for rapid updates of movie/theater/town names. 98 Utterance Task Dialogue Initiative Initiative S: Hello, this is MIMIC, the movie information system. User System How can I help you? U: What time is Analyze This playing in Montclair? [what time is analyze this playing in montclair] S: What theater would you like? User System U: Montclair. [montclair] S: Choices for theater are Wellmont Theater and Clearviews Screening Zone. System System What theater would you like? U: Clearviews Screening Zone
Chou, 1998
Wolfgang Reichl and Wu. Chou. 1998. Decision tree state tying based on segmental clustering for acoustic modeling. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing.
Gerald Salton
1971
The SMART Retrieval System.
Prentice Hall, Inc.
akatani and Chu-Carroll, 2000) for how MIMIC's dialoguelevel knowledge is used to override default prosodic assignments for concept-to-speech generation. Question-Type: When Movie: Analyze This Theater: null Town: Montclair (a) Semantic Representation Question-Type: When Movie: mandatory Theater: mandatory Town: optional (b) Task Specification Figure 2: Semantic Representation and Task Specification in Montclair?&quot; MIMIC's semantic representation is constructed by first extracting, for each attribute, a set of keywords from the user utterance. Using a vector-based topic identification process (Salton, 1971; Chu-Carroll and Carpenter, 1999), these keywords are used to determine a set of likely values (including null) for that attribute. Next, the utterance is interpreted with respect to the dialogue history and the system's domain knowledge. This allows MIMIC to handle elliptical sentences and anaphoric references, as well as automatically infer missing values and detect inconsistencies in the current representation. This semantic representation allows for decoupling of domain-dependent task specifications and domain99 independent dialogue management strategies. Each query type is specified by a
Salton, 1971
Gerald Salton. 1971. The SMART Retrieval System. Prentice Hall, Inc.
Stephanie Seneff
James Glass
David Goddeau
David Goodine
Lynette Hirschman
Hong Leung
Michael Phillips
Joseph Polifroni
Victor Zue
Development and preliminary evaluation of the MIT ATIS system.
1991
In Proceedings of the DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop,
88--93
iscussed in further detail in the rest of this section. 4. Text-to-speech engine: the TTS system receives the word string comprising the system's response from the dialogue component and converts the text into speech for output over the telephone. We used the Bell Labs TTS system (Sproat, 1998), which in addition to converting plain text into speech, accepts text strings annotated to override default pitch height, accent placement, speaking rate, etc.2 3.1 Semantic Interpretation MIMIC utilizes a non-recursive frame-based semantic representation commonly used in spoken dialogue systems (e.g. (Seneff et al., 1991; Lamel, 1998)), which represents an utterance as a set of attribute-value pairs. Figure 2(a) shows the frame-based semantic representation for the utterance &quot;What time is Analyze This playing 2 See (Nakatani and Chu-Carroll, 2000) for how MIMIC's dialoguelevel knowledge is used to override default prosodic assignments for concept-to-speech generation. Question-Type: When Movie: Analyze This Theater: null Town: Montclair (a) Semantic Representation Question-Type: When Movie: mandatory Theater: mandatory Town: optional (b) Task Specification Figure 2: Semantic Representation and Task Specificat
Seneff, Glass, Goddeau, Goodine, Hirschman, Leung, Phillips, Polifroni, Zue, 1991
Stephanie Seneff, James Glass, David Goddeau, David Goodine, Lynette Hirschman, Hong Leung, Michael Phillips, Joseph Polifroni, and Victor Zue. 1991. Development and preliminary evaluation of the MIT ATIS system. In Proceedings of the DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop, pages 88-93.
Glenn Shafer
A Mathematical Theory of Evidence.
1976
Princeton University Press.
tion capabilities resulted in better system performance. 2.2 An Evidential Framework for Modeling Initiative In previous work, we proposed a framework for modeling initiative during dialogue interaction (Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998). This framework predicts task and dialogue initiative holders on a turn-by-turn basis in humanhuman dialogues based on participant roles (such as each dialogue agent's level of expertise and the role that she plays in the application domain), cues observed in the current dialogue turn, and dialogue history. More specifically, we utilize the Dempster-Shafer theory (Shafer, 1976; Gordon and Shortliffe, 1984), and represent the current initiative distribution as two basic probability assignments (bpas) which indicate the amount of support for each dialogue participant having the task and dialogue initiatives. For instance, the bpa mt—cur ({S)) = 'Although the dialogues we collected in our experiments (Section 5) include cases in which MIMIC has neither initiative, such cases are rare in this application domain, and will not be discussed further in this paper. 0.3, Mt—cur({U}) = 0.7 indicates that, with all evidence taken into account, there is more support (to the deg
Shafer, 1976
Glenn Shafer. 1976. A Mathematical Theory of Evidence. Princeton University Press.
Multilingual Text-toSpeech Synthesis: The Bell Labs Approach.
1998
Richard Sproat, editor.
Kluwer,
Boston, MA.
1998
Richard Sproat, editor. 1998. Multilingual Text-toSpeech Synthesis: The Bell Labs Approach. Kluwer, Boston, MA.
Amanda Stent
John Dowding
Jean Mark Gawron
Elizabeth Owen Bratt
Robert Moore
The CommandTalk spoken dialogue system.
1999
In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
183--190
o domain/problemsolving goals, while dialogue initiative affects the cur5An alternative strategy to step (4) is to perform a database lookup based on the ambiguous query and summarize the results (Litman et al., 1998), which we leave for future work. rent discourse goal, we developed alternative strategies for achieving the goals in Figure 4 based on initiative distribution, as shown in Table 1. The strategies employed when MIMIC has only dialogue initiative are similar to the mixed initiative dialogue strategies employed by many existing spoken dialogue systems (e.g., (Bennacef et at., 1996; Stent et al., 1999)). To instantiate an attribute, MIMIC adopts the InfoSeek dialogue act to solicit the missing information. In contrast, when MIMIC has both initiatives, it plays a more active role by presenting the user with additional information comprising valid instantiations of the attribute (GiveOptions). Given an invalid query, MIMIC notifies the user of the failed query and provides an openended prompt when it only has dialogue initiative. When MIMIC has both initiatives, however, in addition to NotifyFailure, it suggests an alternative close to the user's original query and provides a limited prompt. 
Stent, Dowding, Gawron, Bratt, Moore, 1999
Amanda Stent, John Dowding, Jean Mark Gawron, Elizabeth Owen Bratt, and Robert Moore. 1999. The CommandTalk spoken dialogue system. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 183-190.
Peter van Beek
Robin Cohen
Ken Schmidt
From plan critiquing to clarification dialogue for cooperative response generation.
1993
Computational Intelligence,
9
2--132
van Beek, Cohen, Schmidt, 1993
Peter van Beek, Robin Cohen, and Ken Schmidt. 1993. From plan critiquing to clarification dialogue for cooperative response generation. Computational Intelligence, 9 (2):132-154 .
Marilyn Walker
Steve Whittaker
Mixed initiative in dialogue: An investigation into discourse segmentation.
1990
In Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
70--78
stantiate(ambiguous-attr) Else /* more than one value specified Constrain(ambiguous-attr) Else if InvalidAction detected ProvideNegativeAnswer(SemRep) Else 1* well-formed query */ answer 4-- database-query(SemRep) ProvideAnswer(answer) Figure 4: Goal Selection Algorithm user queries (steps 1-8)5 (van Beek et al., 1993; Raskutti and Zukerman, 1993; Qu and Beale, 1999), and 2) providing answers to well-formed queries (steps 9-11). 3.2.3 Strategy Selection Previous work has argued that initiative affects the degree of control an agent has in the dialogue interaction (Whittaker and Stenton, 1988; Walker and Whittaker, 1990; Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998). Thus, a cooperative system may adopt different strategies to achieve the same goal depending on the initiative distribution. Since task initiative models contribution to domain/problemsolving goals, while dialogue initiative affects the cur5An alternative strategy to step (4) is to perform a database lookup based on the ambiguous query and summarize the results (Litman et al., 1998), which we leave for future work. rent discourse goal, we developed alternative strategies for achieving the goals in Figure 4 based on initiative distribution, as shown in Table 1. T
Walker, Whittaker, 1990
Marilyn Walker and Steve Whittaker. 1990. Mixed initiative in dialogue: An investigation into discourse segmentation. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 70-78.
Marilyn A Walker
Diane J Litman
Candance A Kamm
Alicia Abella
PARADISE: A framework for evaluating spoken dialogue agents.
1997
In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
271--280
tems. In this section we summarize these experiments and their results. A companion paper describes the evaluation process and results in further detail (Chu-Carroll and Nickerson, 2000). Each experiment involved eight users interacting with MIMIC and MIMIC-SI or MIMIC-MI to perform a set of tasks, each requiring the user to obtain specific movie information. User satisfaction was assessed by asking the subjects to fill out a questionnaire after interacting with each version of the system. Furthermore, a number of performance features, largely based on the PARADISE dialogue evaluation scheme (Walker et al., 1997), were automatically logged, derived, or manually annotated. In addition, we logged the cues automatically detected in each user utterance, as well as the initiative distribution for each turn and the dialogue acts selected to generate each system response. The features gathered from the dialogue interactions were analyzed along three dimensions: system performance, discourse features (in terms of characteristics of the resulting dialogues, such as the cues detected in user utterances), and initiative distribution. Our results show that MIMIC's adaptation capabilities 1) led to better system p
Walker, Litman, Kamm, Abella, 1997
Marilyn A. Walker, Diane J. Litman, Candance A. Kamm, and Alicia Abella. 1997. PARADISE: A framework for evaluating spoken dialogue agents. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 271-280.
Steve Whittaker
Phil Stenton
Cues and control in expert-client dialogues.
1988
In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
123--130
* attribute unspecified */ Instantiate(ambiguous-attr) Else /* more than one value specified Constrain(ambiguous-attr) Else if InvalidAction detected ProvideNegativeAnswer(SemRep) Else 1* well-formed query */ answer 4-- database-query(SemRep) ProvideAnswer(answer) Figure 4: Goal Selection Algorithm user queries (steps 1-8)5 (van Beek et al., 1993; Raskutti and Zukerman, 1993; Qu and Beale, 1999), and 2) providing answers to well-formed queries (steps 9-11). 3.2.3 Strategy Selection Previous work has argued that initiative affects the degree of control an agent has in the dialogue interaction (Whittaker and Stenton, 1988; Walker and Whittaker, 1990; Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998). Thus, a cooperative system may adopt different strategies to achieve the same goal depending on the initiative distribution. Since task initiative models contribution to domain/problemsolving goals, while dialogue initiative affects the cur5An alternative strategy to step (4) is to perform a database lookup based on the ambiguous query and summarize the results (Litman et al., 1998), which we leave for future work. rent discourse goal, we developed alternative strategies for achieving the goals in Figure 4 based on initiative distribu
Whittaker, Stenton, 1988
Steve Whittaker and Phil Stenton. 1988. Cues and control in expert-client dialogues. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 123-130.
Qiru Zhou
Chin-Hui Lee
Wu Chou
Andrew Pargellis
Speech technology integration and research platform: A system study.
1997
In Proceedings of the 5th European Conference on Speech Communication and Technology.
7% and 88% for task and dialogue initiative holders, respectively. In Section 3.2, we discuss how this predictive model is converted into a generative model by enabling the system to automatically detect cues that were previously labelled manually. We further discuss how the model is used by the dialogue manager for dynamic dialogue strategy adaptation. 3 MIMIC: Mixed Initiative Movie Information Consultant MIMIC is a telephone-based dialogue system that provides movie showtime information. It consists of the following main components, implemented on a distributed, client-server architecture (Zhou et al., 1997): 1. Telephony server: this component detects rings and hang-ups, and enables streaming of audio data on channels of a telephony board. 2. Speech recognizer: the recognizer receives audio data from the telephony server and generates the word string hypothesis that best matches the audio input. We used the Lucent Automatic Speech Recognizer (Reichl and Chou, 1998; Ortmanns et al., 1999), configured to use class-based probabilistic ngram language models to allow for rapid updates of movie/theater/town names. 98 Utterance Task Dialogue Initiative Initiative S: Hello, this is MIMIC, the movie info
Zhou, Lee, Chou, Pargellis, 1997
Qiru Zhou, Chin-Hui Lee, Wu Chou, and Andrew Pargellis. 1997. Speech technology integration and research platform: A system study. In Proceedings of the 5th European Conference on Speech Communication and Technology.
