Arabic Morphology Generation Using a Concatenative Strategy
Violetta Cavalli-Sforza
Carnegie Technology
Education
4615 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213
violetta@cs.cmu.edu
Abdelhadi Soudi
Computer Science Department
Ecole Nationale de L'Industrie
Minerale
Rabat, Morocco
asoudi @ enim. ac .ma
Teruko Mitamura
Language Technologies
Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
teruko@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
Arabic inflectional morphology requires
infixation, prefixation and suffixation,
giving rise to a large space of morphological
variation. In this paper we describe an
approach to reducing the complexity of
Arabic morphology generation using
discrimination trees and transformational
rules. By decoupling the problem of stem
changes from that of prefixes and suffixes,
we gain a significant reduction in the
number of rules required, as much as a
factor of three for certain verb types. We
focus on hollow verbs but discuss the wider
applicability of the approach.
Introduction
Morphologically, Arabic is a non-concatenative
language. The basic problem with generating
Arabic verbal morphology is the large number of
variants that must be generated. Verbal stems
are based on triliteral or quadriliteral roots (3- or
4-radicals). Stems are formed by a derivational
combination of a root morpheme and a vowel
melody; the two are arranged according to
canonical patterns. Roots are said to
interdigitate with patterns to form stems. For
example, the Arabic stem katab (he wrote) is
composed of the morpheme ktb (notion of
writing) and the vowel melody morpheme `a-a'.
The two are coordinated according to the pattern
CVCVC (C=consonant, V=vowel).
There are 15 triliteral patterns, of which at least
9 are in common use, and 4 much rarer
quadriliteral patterns. All these patterns undergo
some stem changes with respect to voweling in
the 2 tenses (perfect and imperfect), the 2 voices
(active and passive), and the 5 moods
(indicative, subjunctive, jussive, imperative and
energetic).1 The stem used in the conjugation of
the verb may differ depending on the person,
number, gender, tense, mood, and the presence
of certain root consonants. Stem changes
combine with suffixes in the perfect indicative
(e.g., katab-naa 'we wrote', kutib-a 'it was
written') and the imperative (e.g. uktub-uu
'write', plural), and with both prefixes and
suffixes for the imperfect tense in the indicative,
subjunctive, and jussive moods (e.g. ya-ktub-na
'they write, feminine plural') and in the
energetic mood (e.g. ya-ktub-unna or ya-ktub-un
'he certainly writes'). There are a total of 13
person-number-gender combinations. Distinct
prefixes are used in the active and passive voices
in the imperfect, although in most cases this
results in a change in the written form only if
diacritic marks are used.2
Most previous computational treatments of
Arabic morphology are based on linguistic
models that describe Arabic in a nonconcatenative way and focus primarily on
analysis. Beesley (1991) describes a system that
analyzes Arabic words based on Koskenniemi's
1 The jussive is used in specific constructions, for
example, negation in the past with the negative
particle lam (e.g., lam aktub 'I didn't write'). The
energetic expresses corroboration of an action taking
place. The indicative is common to both perfect and
imperfect tenses, but the subjunctive and the jussive
are restricted to the imperfect tense. The imperative
has a special form, and the energetic can be derived
from either the imperfect or the imperative.
2 Diacritic marks are used in Arabic language
textbooks and occasionally in regular texts to resolve
ambiguous words (e.g. to mark a passive verb use).
86
(1983) two-level morphology. In Beesley
(1996) the system is reworked into a finite-state
lexical transducer to perform analysis and
generation. In two-level systems, the lexical
level includes short vowels that are typically not
realized on the the surface level. Kiraz (1994)
presents an analysis of Arabic morphology
based on the CV-, moraic-, and affixational
models. He introduces a multi-tape two-level
model and a formalism where three tapes are
used for the lexical level (root, pattern, and
vocalization) and one tape for the surface level.
In this paper, we propose a computational
approach that applies a concatenative treatment
to Arabic morphology generation by separating
the issue of infixation from other inflectional
variations. We are developing an Arabic
morphological generator using MORPHE
(Leavitt, 1994), a tool for modeling morphology
based on discrimination trees and regular
expressions. MORPHE is part of a suite of tools
developed at the Language Technologies
Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, for
knowledge-based machine translation. Large
systems for MT from English to Spanish,
French, German, Portuguese and a prototype for
Italian have already been developed. Within this
framework, we are exploring English to Arabic
translation and Arabic generation for
pedagogical purposes. We generate Arabic
words including short vowels and diacritic
marks, since they are pedagogically useful and
can always be stripped before display.
Our approach seeks to reduce the number of
rules for generating morphological variants of
Arabic verbs by breaking the problem into two
parts. We observe that, with the exception of a
few verb types, there is very little interaction
between stem changes and the processes of
prefixation and suffixation. It is therefore
possible to decouple, in large part, the problem
of stem changes from that of prefixes and
suffixes. The gain is a significant reduction in
the size number of transformational rules, as
much as a factor of three for certain verb classes.
This improves the space efficiency of the system
and its maintainability by reducing duplication
of rules, and simplifies the rules by isolating
different types of changes.
To illustrate our approach, we focus on a
particular type of verbs, termed hollow verbs,
and show how we integrate their treatment with
that of more regular verbs. We also discuss how
the approach can be extended to other classes of
verbs and other parts of speech.
1 Arabic Verbal Morphology
Verb roots in Arabic can be classified as shown
in Figure 1.3 A primary distinction is made
between weak and strong verbs. Weak verbs
have a weak consonant ('w' or 'y') as one or
more of their radicals; strong verbs do not have
any weak radicals.
Strong verbs undergo systematic changes in
stem voweling from the perfect to the imperfect.
The first radical vowel disappears in the
imperfect. Verbs whose middle radical vowel in
the perfect is 'a' can change it to 'a' (e.g.,
qaTa ' a 'he cut' -&gt; yaqTa ' u 'he cuts'),4 T (e.g.,
Daraba 'he hit' -&gt; yaDribu 'he hits'), or `u' (e.g.,
kataba 'he wrote' -&gt; yaktubu 'he writes') in the
imperfect. Verbs whose middle radical vowel in
the perfect is T can only change it to 'a' (e.g.,
shariba 'he drank' -&gt; yashrabu 'he drinks') or T
(e.g., Hasiba 'he supposed' -&gt; yaHsibu 'he
supposes'). Verbs with middle radical vowel 'te
in the perfect do not change it in the imperfect
(e.g., Hasuna 'he was beautiful' -&gt; yaHsunu 'he
is beautiful'). For strong verbs, neither perfect
nor imperfect stems change with person, gender,
or number.
Hollow verbs are those with a weak middle
radical. In both perfect and imperfect tenses, the
underlying stem is realized by two characteristic
allomorphs, one short and one long, whose use
depends on the person, number and gender.
3 Grammars of Arabic are not uniform in their
classification of &quot;hamzated&quot; verbs, verbs containing
the glottal stop as one of the radicals (e.g. [sa?al] 'to
ask'). Wright (1968) includes them as weak verbs,
but Cowan (1964) doesn't. Hamzated verbs change
the written 'seat' of the hamza from 'Mir to `waaw'
or `yaa?', depending on the phonetic context.
4 In the Arabic transcription capital letters indicate
emphatic consonants; 1-1' is the voiceless pharyngeal
fricative ; ' ' the voiced pharyngeal fricative; `?' is
the glottal stop `hamza'.
87
Figure 1: Classification of Arabic Verbal Roots and Mood Tense System
preterit
(perfect)
indicative
tense
participle
present
tfect)
mood
imperative subjunctive jussive energetic
passive
active
triliteral
weak
weak initial weak middle weak final
radical radical radical
(assimilated) (hollow) (defective)
strong
hamzated doubled
radical
regular
Hollow verbs fall into four classes:
1. Verbs of the pattern CawaC or CawuC
(e.g. [Tawul] `to be long'), where the
middle radical is 'w'. Their characteristic
is a long `uu' between the first and last
radical in the imperfect. E.g.,
From the underlying root [zawar]:
zaara 'he visited' and yazuuru 'he visits'
Stem allomorphs:
Perfect: -zur- and -zaarImperfect: -zur- and -zuur2. Verbs of the pattern CawiC, where the
middle radical is 'w'. Their characteristic
is a long `aa' between the first and last
radical in the imperfect. E.g.,
From the underlying root [nawim]:
naama 'he slept and yanaamu 'he sleeps'
Stem allomorphs:
Perfect: -nim- and -naamImperfect: -nam- and -naam
3. Verbs of the pattern CayaC, where the
middle radical is 'y'. Their characteristic
is a long `ii' before the first and last radical
in the imperfect. E.g.,
From the underlying root [bay& ]:
baa' a 'he sold' and yabii u 'he sells'
Stem allomorphs:
Perfect: -bi - and -baa Imperfect: and -bi - and -bii 4. Verbs of the pattern CayiC, where middle
radical is 'y'. E.g.,
From the underlying root [hayib]:
haaba 'he feared' and yahaabu 'he fears'
Stem allomorphs:
Perfect: -hib- and -haabImperfect: -hab- and -haabIn the relevant literature (e.g., Beesley, 1998;
ICiraz, 1994), verbs belonging to the above
classes are all assumed to have the pattern
CVCVC. The pattern does not show the verb
conjugation class and makes it difficult to
predict the type of stem allomorph to use. To
avoid these problems, we keep information on
the middle radical and vowel in the base form
of the verb. In generation, classes 2 and 4 of
the verb can be handled as one because they
have the same perfect and imperfect stems.5
5 The only exception is the passive participle. Verbs
of classes 1 and 2 behave the same (e.g. Class 1:
[zawar]: mazuwr 'visited': Class 2 [nawil]
manuwl 'obtained'), as do verbs of classes 3 and 4
(e.g. Class 3: [bayas] mabir 'sold', Class 4:
[hayib] 4 mahiib 'feared').
88
We describe our approach to modeling strong
and hollow verbs below, following a
description of the implementation framework.
2 The MORPHE System
MORPHE (Leavitt, 1994) is a tool that
compiles morphological transformation rules
into either a word parsing program or a word
generation program.6 In this paper we will
focus on the use of MORPHE in generation.
Input and Output. MORPHE' s output is
simply a string. Input is a feature structure
(FS) which describes the item that MORPHE
must transform. A FS is implemented as a
recursive Lisp list. Each element of the FS is a
feature-value pair (FVP), where the value can
be atomic or complex. A complex value is
itself a FS. For example, the FS for generating
the Arabic zurtu 'I visited' would be:
( (ROOT &quot; zawar&quot; )
(CAT V) (PAT CVCVC ) (VOW HOL)
(TENSE PERF) (MOOD IND)
(VOICE ACT)
(NUMBER SG) (PERSON 1) )
The choice of feature names and values, other
than ROOT, which identifies the lexical item to
be transformed, is entirely up to the user. The
FVPs in a FS come from one of two sources.
Static features, such as CAT (part of speech)
and ROOT, come from the syntactic lexicon,
which, in addition to the base form of words,
can contain morphological and syntactic
features. Dynamic features, such as TENSE and
NUMBER, are set by MORPHE's caller.
The Morphological Form Hierarchy.
MORPHE is based on the notion of a
morphological form hierarchy (MFH) or tree.
Each internal node of the tree specifies a piece
of the FS that is common to that entire
subtree. The root of the tree is a special node
that simply binds all subtrees together. The
leaf nodes of the tree correspond to distinct
6 MORPHE is written in Common Lisp and the
compiled MFH and transformation rules are
themselves a set of Common Lisp functions.
morphological forms in the language. Each
node in the tree below the root is built by
specifying the parent of the node and the
conjunction or disjunction of FVPs that define
the node. Portions of the Arabic MFH are
shown in Figures 2-4.
Transformational Rules. A rule attached to
each leaf node of the MFH effects the desired
morphological transformations for that node.
A rule consists of one or more mutually
exclusive clauses. The 'if part of a clause is a
regular expression pattern, which is matched
against the value of the feature ROOT (a string).
The 'then' part includes one or more operators,
applied in the given order. Operators include
addition, deletion, and replacement of prefixes,
infixes, and suffixes. The output of the
transformation is the transformed ROOT string.
An example of a rule attached to a node in the
MFH is given in Section 3.1 below.
Process Logic. In generation, the MFH acts as
a discrimination network. The specified FS is
matched against the features defining each
subtree until a leaf is reached. At that point,
MORPHE first checks in the irregular forms
lexicon for an entry indexed by the name of the
leaf node (i.e., the MF) and the value of the
ROOT feature in the FS. If an irregular form is
not found, the transformation rule attached to
the leaf node is tried. If no rule is found or
none of the clauses of the applicable rule
match, MORPHE returns the value of ROOT
unchanged.
3 Handling Arabic Verbal
Morphology in MORPHE
Figure 2 sketches the basic MFH and the
division of the verb subtree into stem changes
and prefix/suffix additions.7 The inflected verb
is generated in two steps. MORPHE is first
called with the feature CHG set to STEM. The
required stem is returned and temporarily
substituted for the value of the ROOT feature.
7 The use of two parts of the same tree for the two
problems is a constraint of MORPHE's
implementation, which does not permit multiple
trees with separate roots.
89
The second call to MORPHE, with feature CHG
set to PSFIX, adds the necessary prefix and/or
suffix and returns the fully inflected verb.
Figure 2: The Basic Verb Hierarchy
Figure 2 also shows some of the features used
to traverse the discrimination tree. The feature
PAT is used in conjunction with the ROOT
feature to select the appropriate affixes.
Knowing the underlying root and its voweling
is crucial for the determination of hollow verb
stems, as described in Section 1. Knowing the
pattern is also important in cases where it is
unclear. For example, verbs of pattern
CtVCVC insert a 't' after the first radical (e.g.
ntacial `to move, change location',
intransitive). With some consonants as first
radicals, in order to facilitate pronunciation,
the T undergoes a process of assimilation
whose effects differ depending on the
preceding consonant. For example, the pattern
CtVCVC verb from zaHam `to shove' instead
of *ztaHam is zdaHam `to team'. It is also
difficult to determine from just the string
ntaqat whether this is pattern nCVCVC of the
verb *tacial (if it existed) or pattern CtVCVC
of nacial `to transport, move', transitive).
3.1 Handling Strong and Hollow Verb
Morphology in MORPHE
As a demonstration of our approach, we
discuss the case of hollow verbs, whose
characteristics were described in Section 1.
Figure 3 shows the MFH for strong and hollow
verbs of pattern CVCVC in the perfect tense,
active voice. We use the feature VOW to carry
information about the voweling of the verb in
the imperfect (discussed below) and overload it
to distinguish hollow and other kinds of verbs.
Figure 3: The Perfect Stem Change Subtree for
Strong and Hollow Verbs of Pattern CVCVC
In the perfect active voice, regular strong verbs
do not undergo any stem changes, but doubled
radical verbs do. Rules effecting these changes
are attached to the node labeled with the FVP
(vow (*or* a i u)).8 The hollow verbs, on the
other hand, use a long stem with a middle 'alif
(e.g. [dawn] `to last') for third person singular
and dual (masculine and feminine) and for
third person plural masculine. The remaining
person-number-gender combinations take a
short stem whose voweling depends on the
underlying root of the verb, as specified earlier.
Transformation rules attached to the leaf nodes
perform the conversion of the ROOT feature
value to the short and long stem.
Inside the stem change rules, the four different
classes of hollow verbs are treated as three
separate conditions (classes 2 and 4 can be
merged, as described in Section 1) by matching
on the middle radical and the adjacent vowels
and replacing them with the appropriate vowel.
8 Hamzated verbs changes are due to interactions
with specific suffixes and are best dealt with in the
prefixation and suffixation subtree.
(CAT V) (CAT N) (CAT ADJ)
A A
(CHG STEM) (CHG PSFIX)
A
(PAT VCVC) (PAT CVCCVC) other forms
(TENSE PERF) (TENSE IMPERF)
A
A
(TENSE PERF)
(VOW HOL) (VOW (*or* a i u))
(PERS 3)
(NUM PL)
(PERS (*or* 1 2))
short stem
(NUM (*or* sg dl))
long stem
(GENDER M) (GENDER F)
long stem short stem
90
An example of such a rule, which changes the
perfect stem to a short one for persons 1 and 2
both singular and plural, follows.
(morph-rule v-stem-f1-act-perf-12
(&quot;^Mcons)(awa)%(cons)$&quot;
(ri *1* &quot;u&quot;))
(&quot;A%{cons}(a[wy]i)%(cons}$&quot;
(ri *1* &quot;i&quot;))
(&quot;^%{cons)(aya)Mcons)$&quot;
(ri *1* &quot;i&quot;)))
The syntax % (liar) is used to indicate
variables with a given set of values. Enclosing
a string in parenthesis associates it with a
numbered register, so the replace infix (ri)
operator can access it for substitution.
Figure 4 shows the imperfect subtree for strong
and hollow verbs. Strong verbs are treated
efficiently by three rules branching on the
middle radical vowel, given as the value of
vow. The consonant-vowel pattern of the
computed stem is shown (e.g. for kataba 'he
wrote', the imperfect stem would be -ktub- in
the pattern CCuC). As described in Section 1,
the possible vowel in the imperfect is restricted
but not always determined by the perfect
vowel and so must be stored in the syntactic
lexicon.9 Separating stem changes from the
addition of prefixes and suffixes significantly
reduces the number of transformation rules that
must be written by eliminating much repetition
of prefix and suffix addition for different stem
changes. For strong verbs of pattern CVCVC,
there is at least a three-fold reduction in the
number of rules for active voice (recall the
different kinds of vowel changes for these
verbs from perfect to imperfect described in
Section 1). Other patterns and the passive of
pattern CVCVC verbs show less variation in
stem voweling but more variation in prefix and
suffix voweling. Since some of the patterns
share the same prefix and suffix voweling,
once the stem has been determined, the
prefixation and suffixation rules can be shared
by pattern groups.
9 In the presence of certain second and third
radicals, the middle radical vowel is more precisely
determined. This information can be incorporated
into the syntactic lexicon as it is being built.
The hollow verb subtree is not as small for the
imperfect as it is for the perfect, since the stem
depends not only on the mood but also on the
person, gender, and number. It is still
advantageous to decouple stem changes from
prefixation and suffixation. Suffixes differ in
the indicative and subjunctive moods; if the
two types of changes were merged, the stem
transformations would have to be repeated in
each of the two moods and for each personnumber-gender combination. The same
observation applies to stem changes in the
passive voice as well. Significant replication
of transformational rules that include stem
changes makes the system bigger and harder to
maintain in case of changes, particularly
because each transformational rule needs to
take into consideration the four different
classes of hollow verbs.
3.2 An Example of Generation
Consider again the example verb form zurtu 'I
visited' and the feature structure (FS) given in
Section 2. During generation, the featurevalue pair (cHo STENO is added to the FS
before the first call to MORPHE. Traversing
the MFH shown in Figure 2, MORPHE finds
the rule v- s t em-fl-ac t -per f -12 given in
Section 3.1 above. The first clause fires,
replacing the `awa' with `ti' and MORPHE
returns the stem -zur-. This stem is substituted
as the value of the ROOT feature in the FS and
the feature-value pair (CHG STEM) is changed
to (CHO PSFIX) before the second call to
MORPHE. This time MORPHE traverses a
different subtree and reaches the rule:
(morph-rule v-psfix-perf-1-sg
(4-s &quot;otu&quot;)))
This rule, currently simply appends &quot;otu&quot; to
the string, and MORPHE returns the string
&quot;zurotu&quot;, where the 'o' denotes the diacritic
&quot;sukuun&quot; or absence of vowel. This is the
desired form for zurtu 'I visited'.
91
(TENSE IMPERF)
Figure 4: The Imperfect Stem Change Subtree for Strong and Hollow Verbs of Pattern CvCvC
(MOOD (*or* IND SUB))
(MOOD JUS)
(PERS (*or* 2 3)) (PERS (*or* 2 3)) (GENDER M) (GENDER F) (PERS (*or* 2 3)) (PERS (*or* 2 3))
(GENDER M) (GENDER F) short stem long stem (GENDER M) (GENDER F)
long stem short stem long stem short stem
(NUM SG)
(PERS (*or* 1 3))
short stem
(NUM DL)
long stem
(PERS 1)
short stem
(NUM PL)
(NUM (*or* sg di))
long stem
(PERS 1)
long stem
(NUM PL)
(PERS 2)
4 Extensions
In this paper so far we have focused on regular
and hollow verbs of the pattern CVCVC. Here
we examine how our approach applies to other
verb types and other parts of speech.
4.1 Extending the Approach to Other
Verb Types
The two-step treatment of verbal inflection
described in this paper is easily extended to the
passive, to doubled radical and hamzated
verbs, and to different patterns of strong and
hollow verbs. In fact, since not all higher
patterns are affected by the presence of a
middle or weak radical (e.g. patterns CVCCV,
CaaCVC, taCVCCVC and others), the subtrees
for these patterns will be significantly less
bushy than for pattern CVCVC. The two-step
treatment also covers verbs with a weak first
radical, especially the radical 'w' which is
normally dropped in the active imperfect (e.g.
perfect stem warad 'to come', imperfect stem rid-).10 Alternatively, it can be placed in the
10 Exceptions to this rule exist (e.g. the verb wajil
`to be afraid'), with imperfect stem — wjal-) but are
rare and can be handled in MORPHE by placing the
irregular stem in the syntactic lexicon and checking
for it prior to calling MORPHE for stem changes.
irregular lexicon, which MORPHE consults
when it reaches a leaf node, prior to applying
any of the transformational rules.
Verbs with a weak third radical, including
doubly or trebly weak verbs, are the most
problematic since the stem changes interact
heavily with the inflectional suffixes, and less
is gained by trying to modify the stem
separately. We are currently investigating this
issue and the best way to treat it in MORPHE.
4.2 Extending the Approach to Other
Parts of Speech
The two-step approach to generating verbal
morphology also presents advantages for the
inflectional morphology of nouns and
adjectives. In Arabic, the plural of many
nouns, especially masculine nouns, is not
formed regularly by suffixation. Instead, the
stem itself undergoes changes according to a
complex set of patterns (e.g. rajul 'man'
pluralizes as rijaal `men'), giving rise to socalled &quot;broken plurals&quot;. The inflection of
broken plurals according to case (nominative,
genitive, accusative) and definiteness,
however, is basically the same as the inflection
The radical 'y' is largely not dropped or changed.
92
of most masculine or feminine singular nouns.
The same holds true for adjectives.
Finally we note that our two-step approach can
also be used to combine derivational and
inflectional morphology for nouns and
adjectives. Deverbal nouns and present and
past participles can be derived regularly from
each verb pattern (with the exception of
deverbal nouns from pattern CVCVC).
Relational or &quot;nisba&quot; adjectives are derived,
with small variations, from nouns. Since these
parts of speech are inflected as normal nouns
and adjectives, we can perform derivational
and inflectional morphology in two calls to
MORPFIE, much as we do stem change and
prefix/suffix addition.
Conclusion
We have presented a computational model that
handles Arabic morphology generation
concatenatively by separating the infixation
changes undergone by an Arabic stem from the
processes of prefixation and suffixation. Our
approach was motivated by practical concerns.
We sought to make efficient use of a
morphological generation tool that is part of
our standard environment for developing
machine translation systems. The two-step
approach significantly reduces the number of
morphological transformation rules that must
be written, allowing the Arabic generator to be
smaller, simpler, and easier to maintain.
The current implementation has been tested on
a subset of verbal morphology including
hollow verbs and various types of strong verbs.
We are currently working on the other kinds of
weak verbs: defective and assimilated verbs.
Other categories of words can be handled in a
similar manner, and we will turn our attention
to them next.
References
K. Beesley. 1990. Finite-State Description of
Arabic Morphology. In Proceedings of the
Second Cambridge Conference: Bilingual
Computing in Arabic and English.
K. Beesley. 1991. Computer Analysis of Arabic: A
Two-Level Approach with Detours. In B. Comrie
and M. Eid, editors, Perspectives on Arabic
Linguistics III: Papers from the Third Annual
Symposium on Arabic Linguistics. Benjamins,
Amsterdam, pages 155-172.
K. Beesley. 1996. Arabic Finite-State
Morphological Analysis and Generation. In
Proceedings COLING'96, Vol. 1, pages 89-94.
K. Beesley. 1998. Consonant Spreading in Arabic
Stems. In Proceedings of COLING '98.
D. Cowan. 1964. An introduction to modern
literary Arabic. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
G. Hudson. 1986. Arabic Root and Pattern
Morphology without Tiers. Journal of
Linguistics, 22:85-122.
G. Kiraz. 1994. Multi-tape Two-level Morphology:
A Case study in Semitic Non-Linear
Morphology. In Proceedings of COLING-94,
Vol. 1, pages 180-186.
K. Koskenniemi. 1983. Two-level morphology: A
General Computational Model for Word-Form
Recognition and Production. PhD thesis,
University of Helsinki.
A. Lavie, A. Itai, U. Oman, and M. Rimon. 1988.
On the Applicability of Two Level Morphology
to the Inflection of Hebrew Verbs. In
Proceedings of the Association of Literary and
Linguistic Computing Conference.
J.R. Leavitt. 1994. MORPHE: A Morphological
Rule Compiler. Technical Report, CMU-CMT94-MEMO.
J. McCarthy and A. Prince. 1990. Foot and Word
in Prosodic Morphology: The Arabic Broken
Plural. Natural Language and Linguistics
Theory, 8: 209-283.
J. McCarthy and A. Prince. 1993. Template in
Prosodic Morphology. In Stvan, L. et al., editors,
Papers from the Third Annual Formal Linguistics
Society of Midamerica Conference,.
Bloomington, Indiana. Indiana University
Linguistics Club, pages 187-218.
G. Ritchie. 1992. Languages Generated by TwoLevel Morphological Rules. Computational
Linguistics, 18(1), pages 41-59.
R. Sproat. 1992. Morphology and Computation.
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
H. Wehr. 1971. A Dictionary of Modern Written
Arabic, J.M. Cowan, editor. Spoken Language
Services, Ithaca, NY, fourth edition.
W. Wright. 1988. A Grammar of the Arabic
Language. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, third edition.
93
Arabic Morphology Generation Using a Concatenative Strategy
Violetta Cavalli-Sforza
Carnegie Technology Education
4615 Forbes Avenue Pittsburgh, PA, 15213
violetta@cs.cmu.edu
Abdelhadi Soudi
Computer Science Department Ecole Nationale de L'Industrie Minerale
Rabat, Morocco
ac ma Teruko Mitamura
Language Technologies Institute Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
teruko@cs.cmu.edu
Arabic inflectional morphology requires infixation, prefixation and suffixation, giving rise to a large space of morphological variation. In this paper we describe an approach to reducing the complexity of Arabic morphology generation using discrimination trees and transformational rules. By decoupling the problem of stem changes from that of prefixes and suffixes, we gain a significant reduction in the number of rules required, as much as a factor of three for certain verb types. We focus on hollow verbs but discuss the wider applicability of the approach.
K Beesley
Finite-State Description of Arabic Morphology.
1990
In Proceedings of the Second Cambridge Conference: Bilingual Computing in Arabic and English.
Beesley, 1990
K. Beesley. 1990. Finite-State Description of Arabic Morphology. In Proceedings of the Second Cambridge Conference: Bilingual Computing in Arabic and English.
K Beesley
Computer Analysis of Arabic: A Two-Level Approach with Detours.
1991
Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics III: Papers from the Third Annual Symposium on Arabic Linguistics. Benjamins,
155--172
In B. Comrie and M. Eid, editors,
Amsterdam,
t tense in the indicative, subjunctive, and jussive moods (e.g. ya-ktub-na 'they write, feminine plural') and in the energetic mood (e.g. ya-ktub-unna or ya-ktub-un 'he certainly writes'). There are a total of 13 person-number-gender combinations. Distinct prefixes are used in the active and passive voices in the imperfect, although in most cases this results in a change in the written form only if diacritic marks are used.2 Most previous computational treatments of Arabic morphology are based on linguistic models that describe Arabic in a nonconcatenative way and focus primarily on analysis. Beesley (1991) describes a system that analyzes Arabic words based on Koskenniemi's 1 The jussive is used in specific constructions, for example, negation in the past with the negative particle lam (e.g., lam aktub 'I didn't write'). The energetic expresses corroboration of an action taking place. The indicative is common to both perfect and imperfect tenses, but the subjunctive and the jussive are restricted to the imperfect tense. The imperative has a special form, and the energetic can be derived from either the imperfect or the imperative. 2 Diacritic marks are used in Arabic language textbooks and occa
Beesley, 1991
K. Beesley. 1991. Computer Analysis of Arabic: A Two-Level Approach with Detours. In B. Comrie and M. Eid, editors, Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics III: Papers from the Third Annual Symposium on Arabic Linguistics. Benjamins, Amsterdam, pages 155-172.
K Beesley
Arabic Finite-State Morphological Analysis and Generation.
1996
In Proceedings COLING'96,
1
89--94
example, negation in the past with the negative particle lam (e.g., lam aktub 'I didn't write'). The energetic expresses corroboration of an action taking place. The indicative is common to both perfect and imperfect tenses, but the subjunctive and the jussive are restricted to the imperfect tense. The imperative has a special form, and the energetic can be derived from either the imperfect or the imperative. 2 Diacritic marks are used in Arabic language textbooks and occasionally in regular texts to resolve ambiguous words (e.g. to mark a passive verb use). 86 (1983) two-level morphology. In Beesley (1996) the system is reworked into a finite-state lexical transducer to perform analysis and generation. In two-level systems, the lexical level includes short vowels that are typically not realized on the the surface level. Kiraz (1994) presents an analysis of Arabic morphology based on the CV-, moraic-, and affixational models. He introduces a multi-tape two-level model and a formalism where three tapes are used for the lexical level (root, pattern, and vocalization) and one tape for the surface level. In this paper, we propose a computational approach that applies a concatenative treatment to Ara
Beesley, 1996
K. Beesley. 1996. Arabic Finite-State Morphological Analysis and Generation. In Proceedings COLING'96, Vol. 1, pages 89-94.
K Beesley
Consonant Spreading in Arabic Stems.
1998
In Proceedings of COLING '98.
 Perfect: -nim- and -naamImperfect: -nam- and -naam3. Verbs of the pattern CayaC, where the middle radical is 'y'. Their characteristic is a long `ii' before the first and last radical in the imperfect. E.g., From the underlying root [bay& ]: baa' a 'he sold' and yabii u 'he sells' Stem allomorphs: Perfect: -bi - and -baa - Imperfect: and -bi - and -bii - 4. Verbs of the pattern CayiC, where middle radical is 'y'. E.g., From the underlying root [hayib]: haaba 'he feared' and yahaabu 'he fears' Stem allomorphs: Perfect: -hib- and -haabImperfect: -hab- and -haabIn the relevant literature (e.g., Beesley, 1998; ICiraz, 1994), verbs belonging to the above classes are all assumed to have the pattern CVCVC. The pattern does not show the verb conjugation class and makes it difficult to predict the type of stem allomorph to use. To avoid these problems, we keep information on the middle radical and vowel in the base form of the verb. In generation, classes 2 and 4 of the verb can be handled as one because they have the same perfect and imperfect stems.5 5 The only exception is the passive participle. Verbs of classes 1 and 2 behave the same (e.g. Class 1: [zawar]: mazuwr 'visited': Class 2 [nawil] manuw
Beesley, 1998
K. Beesley. 1998. Consonant Spreading in Arabic Stems. In Proceedings of COLING '98.
D Cowan
An introduction to modern literary Arabic.
1964
Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
 (e.g., Hasuna 'he was beautiful' -&gt; yaHsunu 'he is beautiful'). For strong verbs, neither perfect nor imperfect stems change with person, gender, or number. Hollow verbs are those with a weak middle radical. In both perfect and imperfect tenses, the underlying stem is realized by two characteristic allomorphs, one short and one long, whose use depends on the person, number and gender. 3 Grammars of Arabic are not uniform in their classification of &quot;hamzated&quot; verbs, verbs containing the glottal stop as one of the radicals (e.g. [sa?al] 'to ask'). Wright (1968) includes them as weak verbs, but Cowan (1964) doesn't. Hamzated verbs change the written 'seat' of the hamza from 'Mir to `waaw' or `yaa?', depending on the phonetic context. 4 In the Arabic transcription capital letters indicate emphatic consonants; 1-1' is the voiceless pharyngeal fricative ; ' ' the voiced pharyngeal fricative; `?' is the glottal stop `hamza'. 87 Figure 1: Classification of Arabic Verbal Roots and Mood Tense System preterit (perfect) indicative tense participle present tfect) mood imperative subjunctive jussive energetic passive active triliteral weak weak initial weak middle weak final radical radical radical (assimi
Cowan, 1964
D. Cowan. 1964. An introduction to modern literary Arabic. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
G Hudson
Arabic Root and Pattern Morphology without Tiers.
1986
Journal of Linguistics,
22--85
Hudson, 1986
G. Hudson. 1986. Arabic Root and Pattern Morphology without Tiers. Journal of Linguistics, 22:85-122.
G Kiraz
Multi-tape Two-level Morphology: A Case study in Semitic Non-Linear Morphology.
1994
In Proceedings of COLING-94,
1
180--186
subjunctive and the jussive are restricted to the imperfect tense. The imperative has a special form, and the energetic can be derived from either the imperfect or the imperative. 2 Diacritic marks are used in Arabic language textbooks and occasionally in regular texts to resolve ambiguous words (e.g. to mark a passive verb use). 86 (1983) two-level morphology. In Beesley (1996) the system is reworked into a finite-state lexical transducer to perform analysis and generation. In two-level systems, the lexical level includes short vowels that are typically not realized on the the surface level. Kiraz (1994) presents an analysis of Arabic morphology based on the CV-, moraic-, and affixational models. He introduces a multi-tape two-level model and a formalism where three tapes are used for the lexical level (root, pattern, and vocalization) and one tape for the surface level. In this paper, we propose a computational approach that applies a concatenative treatment to Arabic morphology generation by separating the issue of infixation from other inflectional variations. We are developing an Arabic morphological generator using MORPHE (Leavitt, 1994), a tool for modeling morphology based on discrimin
Kiraz, 1994
G. Kiraz. 1994. Multi-tape Two-level Morphology: A Case study in Semitic Non-Linear Morphology. In Proceedings of COLING-94, Vol. 1, pages 180-186.
K Koskenniemi
Two-level morphology: A General Computational Model for Word-Form Recognition and Production.
1983
PhD thesis,
University of Helsinki.
Koskenniemi, 1983
K. Koskenniemi. 1983. Two-level morphology: A General Computational Model for Word-Form Recognition and Production. PhD thesis, University of Helsinki.
A Lavie
A Itai
U Oman
M Rimon
On the Applicability of Two Level Morphology to the Inflection of Hebrew Verbs.
1988
In Proceedings of the Association of Literary and Linguistic Computing Conference.
Lavie, Itai, Oman, Rimon, 1988
A. Lavie, A. Itai, U. Oman, and M. Rimon. 1988. On the Applicability of Two Level Morphology to the Inflection of Hebrew Verbs. In Proceedings of the Association of Literary and Linguistic Computing Conference.
J R Leavitt
MORPHE: A Morphological Rule Compiler.
1994
Technical Report, CMU-CMT94-MEMO.
are typically not realized on the the surface level. Kiraz (1994) presents an analysis of Arabic morphology based on the CV-, moraic-, and affixational models. He introduces a multi-tape two-level model and a formalism where three tapes are used for the lexical level (root, pattern, and vocalization) and one tape for the surface level. In this paper, we propose a computational approach that applies a concatenative treatment to Arabic morphology generation by separating the issue of infixation from other inflectional variations. We are developing an Arabic morphological generator using MORPHE (Leavitt, 1994), a tool for modeling morphology based on discrimination trees and regular expressions. MORPHE is part of a suite of tools developed at the Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, for knowledge-based machine translation. Large systems for MT from English to Spanish, French, German, Portuguese and a prototype for Italian have already been developed. Within this framework, we are exploring English to Arabic translation and Arabic generation for pedagogical purposes. We generate Arabic words including short vowels and diacritic marks, since they are pedagogically useful and c
e radical and vowel in the base form of the verb. In generation, classes 2 and 4 of the verb can be handled as one because they have the same perfect and imperfect stems.5 5 The only exception is the passive participle. Verbs of classes 1 and 2 behave the same (e.g. Class 1: [zawar]: mazuwr 'visited': Class 2 [nawil] manuwl 'obtained'), as do verbs of classes 3 and 4 (e.g. Class 3: [bayas] mabir 'sold', Class 4: [hayib] 4 mahiib 'feared'). 88 We describe our approach to modeling strong and hollow verbs below, following a description of the implementation framework. 2 The MORPHE System MORPHE (Leavitt, 1994) is a tool that compiles morphological transformation rules into either a word parsing program or a word generation program.6 In this paper we will focus on the use of MORPHE in generation. Input and Output. MORPHE' s output is simply a string. Input is a feature structure (FS) which describes the item that MORPHE must transform. A FS is implemented as a recursive Lisp list. Each element of the FS is a feature-value pair (FVP), where the value can be atomic or complex. A complex value is itself a FS. For example, the FS for generating the Arabic zurtu 'I visited' would be: ( (ROOT &quot; zawar&quot; ) (
Leavitt, 1994
J.R. Leavitt. 1994. MORPHE: A Morphological Rule Compiler. Technical Report, CMU-CMT94-MEMO.
J McCarthy
A Prince
Foot and Word in Prosodic Morphology: The Arabic Broken Plural. Natural Language and Linguistics Theory,
1990
8
209--283
McCarthy, Prince, 1990
J. McCarthy and A. Prince. 1990. Foot and Word in Prosodic Morphology: The Arabic Broken Plural. Natural Language and Linguistics Theory, 8: 209-283.
J McCarthy
A Prince
Template in Prosodic Morphology.
1993
Papers from the Third Annual Formal Linguistics Society of Midamerica Conference,.
187--218
In Stvan, L. et al., editors,
Bloomington, Indiana. Indiana University Linguistics Club,
McCarthy, Prince, 1993
J. McCarthy and A. Prince. 1993. Template in Prosodic Morphology. In Stvan, L. et al., editors, Papers from the Third Annual Formal Linguistics Society of Midamerica Conference,. Bloomington, Indiana. Indiana University Linguistics Club, pages 187-218.
G Ritchie
Languages Generated by TwoLevel Morphological Rules.
1992
Computational Linguistics,
18
1
41--59
Ritchie, 1992
G. Ritchie. 1992. Languages Generated by TwoLevel Morphological Rules. Computational Linguistics, 18(1), pages 41-59.
R Sproat
Morphology and Computation.
1992
MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass.
Sproat, 1992
R. Sproat. 1992. Morphology and Computation. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
H Wehr
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic,
1971
Spoken Language Services,
J.M. Cowan, editor.
Ithaca, NY,
fourth edition.
Wehr, 1971
H. Wehr. 1971. A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic, J.M. Cowan, editor. Spoken Language Services, Ithaca, NY, fourth edition.
W Wright
A Grammar of the Arabic Language.
1988
Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge,
third edition.
Wright, 1988
W. Wright. 1988. A Grammar of the Arabic Language. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, third edition.
