TnT A Statistical Part-of-Speech Tagger
Thorsten Brants
Saarland University
Computational Linguistics
D-66041 Saarbriicken, Germany
thorsten@coli.uni-sb.de
Abstract
Trigrams'n'Tags (TnT) is an efficient statistical
part-of-speech tagger. Contrary to claims found
elsewhere in the literature, we argue that a tagger
based on Markov models performs at least as well as
other current approaches, including the Maximum
Entropy framework. A recent comparison has even
shown that TnT performs significantly better for the
tested corpora. We describe the basic model of TnT,
the techniques used for smoothing and for handling
unknown words. Furthermore, we present evaluations on two corpora.
1 Introduction
A large number of current language processing systems use a part-of-speech tagger for pre-processing.
The tagger assigns a (unique or ambiguous) part-ofspeech tag to each token in the input and passes its
output to the next processing level, usually a parser.
Furthermore, there is a large interest in part-ofspeech tagging for corpus annotation projects, who
create valuable linguistic resources by a combination
of automatic processing and human correction.
For both applications, a tagger with the highest
possible accuracy is required. The debate about
which paradigm solves the part-of-speech tagging
problem best is not finished. Recent comparisons
of approaches that can be trained on corpora (van
Halteren et al., 1998; Volk and Schneider, 1998) have
shown that in most cases statistical aproaches (Cutting et al., 1992; Schmid, 1995; Ratnaparkhi, 1996)
yield better results than finite-state, rule-based, or
memory-based taggers (Brill, 1993; Daelemans et al.,
1996). They are only surpassed by combinations of
different systems, forming a &quot;voting tagger&quot;.
Among the statistical approaches, the Maximum
Entropy framework has a very strong position. Nevertheless, a recent independent comparison of 7 taggers (Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999) has shown that
another approach even works better: Markov models combined with a good smoothing technique and
with handling of unknown words. This tagger, TnT,
not only yielded the highest accuracy, it also was the
fastest both in training and tagging.
The tagger comparison was organized as a &quot;blackbox test&quot;: set the same task to every tagger and
compare the outcomes. This paper describes the
models and techniques used by TnT together with
the implementation.
The reader will be surprised how simple the underlying model is. The result of the tagger comparison
seems to support the maxime &quot;the simplest is the
best&quot;. However, in this paper we clarify a number
of details that are omitted in major previous publications concerning tagging with Markov models.
As two examples, (Rabiner, 1989) and (Charniak
et al., 1993) give good overviews of the techniques
and equations used for Markov models and part-ofspeech tagging, but they are not very explicit in the
details that are needed for their application. We argue that it is not only the choice of the general model
that determines the result of the tagger but also the
various &quot;small&quot; decisions on alternatives.
The aim of this paper is to give a detailed account of the techniques used in TnT. Additionally,
we present results of the tagger on the NEGRA corpus (Brants et al., 1999) and the Penn Treebank
(Marcus et al., 1993). The Penn Treebank results
reported here for the Markov model approach are
at least equivalent to those reported for the Maximum Entropy approach in (Ratnaparkhi, 1996). For
a comparison to other taggers, the reader is referred
to (Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999).
2 Architecture
2.1 The Underlying Model
TnT uses second order Markov models for part-ofspeech tagging. The states of the model represent
tags, outputs represent the words. Transition probabilities depend on the states, thus pairs of tags.
Output probabilities only depend on the most recent category. To be explicit, we calculate
IT 1
argmax I fl P(ttiti_i,ti_2)P(wiltz) I P(tT+iltT)
ti •••tT
(1)
for a given sequence of words w1 of length T.
t1 tr are elements of the tagset, the additional
224
tags t_1, to, and t7-,±1 are beginning-of-sequence
and end-of-sequence markers. Using these additional
tags, even if they stem from rudimentary processing of punctuation marks, slightly improves tagging
results. This is different from formulas presented
in other publications, which just stop with a &quot;loose
end&quot; at the last word. If sentence boundaries are
not marked in the input, TnT adds these tags if it
encounters one of [.!?;] as a token.
Transition and output probabilities are estimated
from a tagged corpus. As a first step, we use the
maximum likelihood probabilities P which are derived from the relative frequencies:
Unigrams: P(t3) = 1(t3)
f (t2 t 3)
P (t3It2) = f (t 2)
f (ti , t2, t3)
Lexical: P(w3 I t3) =
f (t3)
for all t1, t2, t3 in the tagset and w3 in the lexicon. N is the total number of tokens in the training
corpus. We define a maximum likelihood probability to be zero if the corresponding nominators and
denominators are zero. As a second step, contextual frequencies are smoothed and lexical frequences
are completed by handling words that are not in the
lexicon (see below).
2.2 Smoothing
Trigram probabilities generated from a corpus usually cannot directly be used because of the sparsedata problem. This means that there are not enough
instances for each trigram to reliably estimate the
probability. Furthermore, setting a probability to
zero because the corresponding trigram never occured in the corpus has an undesired effect. It causes
the probability of a complete sequence to be set to
zero if its use is necessary for a new text sequence,
thus makes it impossible to rank different sequences
containing a zero probability.
The smoothing paradigm that delivers the best
results in TnT is linear interpolation of unigrams,
bigrams, and trigrams. Therefore, we estimate a
trigram probability as follows:
P(t,iti, t2) = A1P(t3) + A2P(t3It2) + A3P(t3It1 , t2)
(6)
P are maximum likelihood estimates of the probabilities, and A1 + A2 ± A3 = 1, SO P again represent
probability distributions.
We use the context-independent variant of linear
interpolation, i.e., the values of the As do not depend
on the particular trigram. Contrary to intuition,
this yields better results than the context-dependent
variant. Due to sparse-data problems, one cannot estimate a different set of As for each trigram. Therefore, it is common practice to group trigrams by frequency and estimate tied sets of As. However, we
are not aware of any publication that has investigated frequency groupings for linear interpolation in
part-of-speech tagging. All groupings that we have
tested yielded at most equivalent results to contextindependent linear interpolation. Some groupings
even yielded worse results. The tested groupings
included a) one set of As for each frequency value
and b) two classes (low and high frequency) on the
two ends of the scale, as well as several groupings
in between and several settings for partitioning the
classes.
The values of A1, A2, and A3 are estimated by
deleted interpolation. This technique successively
removes each trigram from the training corpus and
estimates best values for the As from all other ngrams in the corpus. Given the frequency counts
for uni-, bi-, and trigrams, the weights can be very
efficiently determined with a processing time linear
in the number of different trigrams. The algorithm
is given in figure 1. Note that subtracting 1 means
taking unseen data into account. Without this subtraction the model would overfit the training data
and would generally yield worse results.
2.3 Handling of Unknown Words
Currently, the method of handling unknown words
that seems to work best for inflected languages is
a suffix analysis as proposed in (Samuelsson, 1993).
Tag probabilities are set according to the word's ending. The suffix is a strong predictor for word classes,
e.g., words in the Wall Street Journal part of the
Penn Treebank ending in able are adjectives (.11) in
98% of the cases (e.g. fashionable, variable) , the rest
of 2% are nouns (e.g. cable, variable).
The probability distribution for a particular suffix is generated from all words in the training set
that share the same suffix of some predefined maximum length. The term suffix as used here means
&quot;final sequence of characters of a word&quot; which is not
necessarily a linguistically meaningful suffix.
Probabilities are smoothed by successive abstraction. This calculates the probability of a tag t
given the last m letters i of an n letter word:
P(t1/7„,+1,,..ln). The sequence of increasingly
more general contexts omits more and more characters of the suffix, such that P(tlin-m+2, • • •
P(tlin_m+3, ,i), , P(t) are used for smoothing. The recursion formula is
P(tI/n-2-1-1, • - • In)
1(tlin-2+1, in) ±
(7)
1+ 0,
Trigrams: P(t3 Iti t2) —
f (ti , t2)
Bigrams:
225
set A = A2 = A3 = 0
foreach trigram t1,t2,t3 with f (ti,t2,t3) >0
depending on the maximum of the following three values:
f(ti,t243)--1
f (ti 42)-1 •
f(t243)--1
f(t3)-1 •
(t3)-1
N -1 '
end
end
normalize A1, A2, A3
case
case
case
increment A1 by f (ti, t2 t3)
increment A3 by f (ti, t2, t3)
increment A2 by (ti , t21t3)
Figure 1: Algorithm for calculting the weights for context-independent linear interpolation A1, A2, A3 when
the n-gram frequencies are known. N is the size of the corpus. If the denominator in one of the expressions
is 0, we define the result of that expression to be 0.
for i = m ... 0, using the maximum likelihood estimates P from frequencies in the lexicon, weights Oi
and the initialization
P(t) = P(t). (8)
The maximum likelihood estimate for a suffix of
length i is derived from corpus frequencies by
f (t,In—i+17 • - • ln)
f'(tiln_i+i, • • • .n)(9)
J • • • I\n)
For the Markov model, we need the inverse conditional probabilities P(1,2_1+1, ... /Tilt) which are obtained by Bayesian inversion.
A theoretical motivated argumentation uses the
standard deviation of the maximum likelihood probabilities for the weights 0, (Samuelsson, 1993).
This leaves room for interpretation.
1) One has to identify a good value for in, the
longest suffix used. The approach taken for TnT is
the following: in depends on the word in question.
We use the longest suffix that we can find in the
training set (i.e., for which the frequency is greater
than or equal to 1), but at most 10 characters. This
is an empirically determined choice.
2) We use a context-independent approach for 0„
as we did for the contextual weights A. It turned
out to be a good choice to set all 0, to the standard
deviation of the unconditioned maximum likelihood
probabilities of the tags in the training corpus, i.e.,
we set
s (10)
3=1
for all i = 0 ... m — 1, using a tagset of s tags and
the average
(11)
This usually yields values in the range 0,03 ... 0.10.
3) We use different estimates for uppercase and
lowercase words, i.e., we maintain two different suffix
tries depending on the capitalization of the word.
This information improves the tagging results.
4) Another freedom concerns the choice of the
words in the lexicon that should be used for suffix handling. Should we use all words, or are some
of them better suited than others? Accepting that
unknown words are most probably infrequent, one
can argue that using suffixes of infrequent words in
the lexicon is a better approximation for unknown
words than using suffixes of frequent words. Therefore, we restrict the procedure of suffix handling to
words with a frequency smaller than or equal to some
threshold value. Empirically, 10 turned out to be a
good choice for this threshold.
2.4 Capitalization
Additional information that turned out to be useful for the disambiguation process for several corpora and tagsets is capitalization information. Tags
are usually not informative about capitalization, but
probability distributions of tags around capitalized
words are different from those not capitalized. The
effect is larger for English, which only capitalizes
proper names, and smaller for German, which capitalizes all nouns.
We use flags ci that are true if wi is a capitalized
word and false otherwise. These flags are added to
the contextual probability distributions. Instead of
P(t3lt1,t2) (12)
we use
P(t3, C3 Iti Cl, t2, C2) (13)
and equations (3) to (5) are updated accordingly.
This is equivalent to doubling the size of the tagset
and using different tags depending on capitalization.
226
2.5 Beam Search
The processing time of the Viterbi algorithm (Rabiner, 1989) can be reduced by introducing a beam
search. Each state that receives a 6 value smaller
than the largest 6 divided by some threshold value
0 is excluded from further processing. While the
Viterbi algorithm is guaranteed to find the sequence
of states with the highest probability, this is no
longer true when beam search is added. Nevertheless, for practical purposes and the right choice of
0, there is virtually no difference between the algorithm with and without a beam. Empirically, a value
of 0 = 1000 turned out to approximately double the
speed of the tagger without affecting the accuracy.
The tagger currently tags between 30,000 and
60,000 tokens per second (including file I/O) on a
Pentium 500 running Linux. The speed mainly depends on the percentage of unknown words and on
the average ambiguity rate.
3 Evaluation
We evaluate the tagger's performance under several
aspects. First of all, we determine the tagging accuracy averaged over ten iterations. The overall accuracy, as well as separate accuracies for known and
unknown words are measured.
Second, learning curves are presented, that indicate the performance when using training corpora of
different sizes, starting with as few as 1,000 tokens
and ranging to the size of the entire corpus (minus
the test set).
An important characteristic of statistical taggers
is that they not only assign tags to words but also
probabilities in order to rank different assignments.
We distinguish reliable from unreliable assignments
by the quotient of the best and second best assignmentsl . All assignments for which this quotient is
larger than some threshold are regarded as reliable,
the others as unreliable. As we will see below, accuracies for reliable assignments are much higher.
The tests are performed on partitions of the corpora that use 90% as training set and 10% as test
set, so that the test data is guaranteed to be unseen
during training. Each result is obtained by repeating the experiment 10 times with different partitions
and averaging the single outcomes.
In all experiments, contiguous test sets are used.
The alternative is a round-robin procedure that puts
every 10th sentence into the test set. We argue that
contiguous test sets yield more realistic results because completely unseen articles are tagged. Using
the round-robin procedure, parts of an article are already seen, which significantly reduces the percentage of unknown words. Therefore, we expect even
'By definition, this quotient is oo if there is only one possible tag for a given word.
higher results when testing on every 10th sentence
instead of a contiguous set of 10%.
In the following, accuracy denotes the number of
correctly assigned tags divided by the number of tokens in the corpus processed. The tagger is allowed
to assign exactly one tag to each token.
We distinguish the overall accuracy, taking into
account all tokens in the test corpus, and separate
accuracies for known and unknown tokens. The latter are interesting, since usually unknown tokens are
much more difficult to process than known tokens,
for which a list of valid tags can be found in the
lexicon.
3.1 Tagging the NEGRA corpus
The German NEGRA corpus consists of 20,000 sentences (355,000 tokens) of newspaper texts (Frankfurter Rundschau) that are annotated with parts-ofspeech and predicate-argument structures (Skut et
al., 1997). It was developed at the Saarland University in Saarbriicken2. Part of it was tagged at the
IMS Stuttgart. This evaluation only uses the partof-speech annotation and ignores structural annotations.
Tagging accuracies for the NEGRA corpus are
shown in table 2.
Figure 3 shows the learning curve of the tagger,
i.e., the accuracy depending on the amount of training data. Training length is the number of tokens
used for training. Each training length was tested
ten times, training and test sets were randomly chosen and disjoint, results were averaged. The training
length is given on a logarithmic scale.
It is remarkable that tagging accuracy for known
words is very high even for very small training corpora. This means that we have a good chance of
getting the right tag if a word is seen at least once
during training. Average percentages of unknown
tokens are shown in the bottom line of each diagram.
We exploit the fact that the tagger not only determines tags, but also assigns probabilities. If there
is an alternative that has a probability &quot;close to&quot;
that of the best assignment, this alternative can be
viewed as almost equally well suited. The notion of
&quot;close to&quot; is expressed by the distance of probabilities, and this in turn is expressed by the quotient
of probabilities. So, the distance of the probabilities of a best tag tbest and an alternative tag tau
is expressed by p(tbest)/P(talt)7 which is some value
greater or equal to 1 since the best tag assignment
has the highest probability.
Figure 4 shows the accuracy when separating assignments with quotients larger and smaller than
the threshold (hence reliable and unreliable assignments). As expected, we find that accuracies for
2For availability, please check
http://www.coli.uni-sb.de/sfb378/negra-corpus
227
Table 2: Part-of-speech tagging accuracy for the NEGRA corpus, averaged over 10 test runs, training and
test set are disjoint. The table shows the percentage of unknown tokens, separate accuracies and standard
deviations for known and unknown tokens, as well as the overall accuracy.
percentage known unknown • overall
unknowns acc. acc. acc. a
11.9% 97.7% 0.23
89.0% 0.72
96.7% 0.29
NEGRA corpus
NEGRA Corpus: POS Learning Curve
e -a 0 • e
• • •
1 I I I 1 I 1 I I I I
2 5 10 20 50 100 200 320 500 10
100
90
mu 80
70
60
50
Overall
mm =78.1%
max=96.7%
Known
min =95.7%
max=97.7%
Unknown
min =61.2%
max=89.0%
00 x1000 Training Length
50.8 46.4 41.4 36.0 30.7 23.0 18.3 14.3 1&quot; 1D.3 I avg. percentage unknown
Figure 3: Learning curve for tagging the NEGRA corpus. The training sets of variable sizes as well as test
sets of 30,000 tokens were randomly chosen. Training and test sets were disjoint, the procedure was repeated
10 times and results were averaged. Percentages of unknowns for 500k and 1000k training are determined
from an untagged extension.
NEGRA Corpus: Accuracy of reliable assignments
Figure 4: Tagging accuracy for the NEGRA corpus when separating reliable and unreliable assignments. The
curve shows accuracies for reliable assignments. The numbers at the bottom line indicate the percentage of
reliable assignments and the accuracy of the complement set (i.e., unreliable assignments).
100 97.9 95.1 92.7 90.3 86.8 84.1 81.0 76.1 71.9 68.3 64.1 62.0
- 53.5 62.9 69.6 74.5 79.8 82.7 85.2 88.0 89.6 90.8 91.8 92.2
% cases reliable
acc. of complement
1 i 1 II 20 50 ii r 500 ill 2000 ii
2 5 10 100 10(
100
99
C.) 98
97
96
--e- Reliable
min =96.7%
max=99.4%
00 threshold 0
228
Table 5: Part-of-speech tagging accuracy for the Penn Treebank. The table shows the percentage of unknown
tokens, separate accuracies and standard deviations for known and unknown tokens, as well as the overall
accuracy.
percentage known unknown overall
unknowns acc. acc. acc.
2.9%
97.0% 0.15
85.5% 0.69
96.7% 0.15
Penn Treebank
Penn Treebank: POS Learning Curve
_ _ - .
, '
1 I I I I I I I I I
2 5 10 20 50 100 200 500 10
100
90
ctu 80
70
60
50
Overall
min =78.6%
max=96.7%
Known
mm =95.2%
max=97.0%
Unknown
min =62.2%
max=85.5%
0 x 1000 Training Length
50.3 42.8 33.4 26.8 20.2 13.2 9.8 7.0 4.4 2.9 avg. percentage unknown
Figure 6: Learning curve for tagging the Penn Treebank. The training sets of variable sizes as well as test sets
of 100,000 tokens were randomly chosen. Training and test sets were disjoint, the procedure was repeated
10 times and results were averaged.
Penn Treebank: Accuracy of reliable assignments
Figure 7: Tagging accuracy for the Penn Treebank when separating reliable and unreliable assignments. The
curve shows accuracies for reliable assignments. The numbers at the bottom line indicate the percentage of
reliable assignments and the accuracy of the complement set.
100 97.7 94.6 92.2 89.8 86.3 83.5 80.4 76.6 73.8 71.0 67.2 64.5
- 53.5 62.8 68.9 73.9 79.3 82.6 85.2 87.5 88.8 89.8 91.0 91.6
% cases reliable
acc. of complement
1 1 5 iii 20 50 III mil
2 10 100 500 2000 10(
100
99
6&quot; 98
97
96
Overall
min =96.6%
max=99.4%
00 threshold
229
reliable assignments are much higher than for unreliable assignments. This distinction is, e.g., useful
for annotation projects during the cleaning process,
or during pre-processing, so the tagger can emit multiple tags if the best tag is classified as unreliable.
3.2 Tagging the Penn Treebank
We use the Wall Street Journal as contained in the
Penn Treebank for our experiments. The annotation
consists of four parts: 1) a context-free structure
augmented with traces to mark movement and discontinuous constituents, 2) phrasal categories that
are annotated as node labels, 3) a small set of grammatical functions that are annotated as extensions to
the node labels, and 4) part-of-speech tags (Marcus
et al., 1993). This evaluation only uses the part-ofspeech annotation.
The Wall Street Journal part of the Penn Treebank consists of approx. 50,000 sentences (1.2 million tokens).
Tagging accuracies for the Penn Treebank are
shown in table 5. Figure 6 shows the learning curve
of the tagger, i.e., the accuracy depending on the
amount of training data. Training length is the number of tokens used for training. Each training length
was tested ten times. Training and test sets were
disjoint, results are averaged. The training length is
given on a logarithmic scale. As for the NEGRA corpus, tagging accuracy is very high for known tokens
even with small amounts of training data.
We exploit the fact that the tagger not only determines tags, but also assigns probabilities. Figure
7 shows the accuracy when separating assignments
with quotients larger and smaller than the threshold
(hence reliable and unreliable assignments). Again,
we find that accuracies for reliable assignments are
much higher than for unreliable assignments.
3.3 Summary of Part-of-Speech Tagging
Results
Average part-of-speech tagging accuracy is between
96% and 97%, depending on language and tagset,
which is at least on a par with state-of-the-art results found in the literature, possibly better. For
the Penn Treebank, (Ratnaparkhi, 1996) reports an
accuracy of 96.6% using the Maximum Entropy approach, our much simpler and therefore faster HMM
approach delivers 96.7%. This comparison needs to
be re-examined, since we use a ten-fold crossvalidation and averaging of results while Ratnaparkhi only
makes one test run.
The accuracy for known tokens is significantly
higher than for unknown tokens. For the German
newspaper data, results are 8.7% better when the
word was seen before and therefore is in the lexicon,
than when it was not seen before (97.7% vs. 89.0%).
Accuracy for known tokens is high even with very
small amounts of training data. As few as 1000 tokens are sufficient to achieve 95%-96% accuracy for
them. It is important for the tagger to have seen a
word at least once during training.
Stochastic taggers assign probabilities to tags. We
exploit the probabilities to determine reliability of
assignments. For a subset that is determined during
processing by the tagger we achieve accuracy rates
of over 99%. The accuracy of the complement set is
much lower. This information can, e.g., be exploited
in an annotation project to give an additional treatment to the unreliable assignments, or to pass selected ambiguities to a subsequent processing step.
4 Conclusion
We have shown that a tagger based on Markov models yields state-of-the-art results, despite contrary
claims found in the literature. For example, the
Markov model tagger used in the comparison of (van
Halteren et al., 1998) yielded worse results than all
other taggers. In our opinion, a reason for the wrong
claim is that the basic algorithms leave several decisions to the implementor. The rather large amount
of freedom was not handled in detail in previous publications: handling of start- and end-of-sequence, the
exact smoothing technique, how to determine the
weights for context probabilities, details on handling
unknown words, and how to determine the weights
for unknown words. Note that the decisions we made
yield good results for both the German and the English Corpus. They do so for several other corpora
as well. The architecture remains applicable to a
large variety of languages.
According to current tagger comparisons (van
Halteren et al., 1998; Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999),
and according to a comparsion of the results presented here with those in (Ratnaparkhi, 1996), the
Maximum Entropy framework seems to be the only
other approach yielding comparable results to the
one presented here. It is a very interesting future
research topic to determine the advantages of either
of these approaches, to find the reason for their high
accuracies, and to find a good combination of both.
TnT is freely available to universities and related organizations for research purposes (see
http://www.coli.uni-sb.derthorstenAnt).
Acknowledgements
Many thanks go to Hans Uszkoreit for his support during the development of TnT. Most of the
work on TnT was carried out while the author
received a grant of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft in the Graduiertenkolleg Kognitionswissenschaft Saarbriicken. Large annotated corpora are
the pre-requisite for developing and testing part-ofspeech taggers, and they enable the generation of
high-quality language models. Therefore, I would
230
like to thank all the people who took the effort
to annotate the Penn Treebank, the Susanne Corpus, the Stuttgarter Referenzkorpus, the NEGRA
Corpus, the Verbmobil Corpora, and several others.
And, last but not least, I would like to thank the
users of TnT who provided me with bug reports and
valuable suggestions for improvements.
References
Thorsten Brants, Wojciech Skut, and Hans Uszkoreit. 1999. Syntactic annotation of a German
newspaper corpus. In Proceedings of the ATALA
Treebank Workshop, pages 69-76, Paris, France.
Eric Brill. 1993. A Corpus-Based Approach to Language Learning. Ph.D. Dissertation, Department
of Computer and Information Science, University
of Pennsylvania.
Eugene Charniak, Curtis Hendrickson, Neil Jacobson, and Mike Perkowitz. 1993. Equations
for part-of-speech tagging. In Proceedings of the
Eleventh National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 784-789, Menlo Park: AAAI
Press/MIT Press.
Doug Cutting, Julian Kupiec, Jan Pedersen, and
Penelope Sibun. 1992. A practical part-of-speech
tagger. In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference
on Applied Natural Language Processing (ACL),
pages 133-140.
Walter Daelemans, Jakub Zavrel, Peter Berck, and
Steven Gillis. 1996. Mbt: A memory-based part
of speech tagger-generator. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Very Large Corpora, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
Mitchell Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics, 19(2):313-330.
Lawrence R. Rabiner. 1989. A tutorial on Hidden Markov Models and selected applications in
speech recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE,
volume 77(2), pages 257-285.
Adwait Ratnaparkhi. 1996. A maximum entropy
model for part-of-speech tagging. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing EMNLP-96, Philadelphia, PA.
Christer Samuelsson. 1993. Morphological tagging based entirely on Bayesian inference. In
9th Nordic Conference on Computational Linguistics NODALIDA-93, Stockholm University,
Stockholm, Sweden.
Helmut Schmid. 1995. Improvements in part-ofspeech tagging with an application to German.
In Helmut Feldweg and Erhard Hinrichts, editors,
Lexikon und Text. Niemeyer, Tübingen.
Wojciech Skut, Brigitte Krenn, Thorsten Brants,
and Hans Uszkoreit. 1997. An annotation scheme
for free word order languages. In Proceedings of
the Fifth Conference on Applied Natural Language
Processing ANLP-97, Washington, DC.
Hans van Halteren, Jakub Zavrel, and Walter Daelemans. 1998. Improving data driven wordclass tagging by system combination. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Computational Linguistics COLING-98, pages 491-497, Montreal,
Canada.
Martin Volk and Gerold Schneider. 1998. Comparing a statistical and a rule-based tagger for german. In Proceedings of KONVENS-98, pages 125137, Bonn.
Jakub Zavrel and Walter Daelemans. 1999. Evaluatie van part-of-speech taggers voor het corpus gesproken nederlands. CGN technical report,
Katholieke Universiteit Brabant, Tilburg.
231
TnT A Statistical Part-of-Speech Tagger
Thorsten Brants
Saarland University Computational Linguistics
D-66041 Saarbriicken, Germany
Trigrams'n'Tags (TnT) is an efficient statistical part-of-speech tagger. Contrary to claims found elsewhere in the literature, we argue that a tagger based on Markov models performs at least as well as other current approaches, including the Maximum Entropy framework. A recent comparison has even shown that TnT performs significantly better for the tested corpora. We describe the basic model of TnT, the techniques used for smoothing and for handling unknown words. Furthermore, we present evaluations on two corpora.
Thorsten Brants
Wojciech Skut
Hans Uszkoreit
Syntactic annotation of a German newspaper corpus.
1999
In Proceedings of the ATALA Treebank Workshop,
69--76
Paris, France.
ons concerning tagging with Markov models. As two examples, (Rabiner, 1989) and (Charniak et al., 1993) give good overviews of the techniques and equations used for Markov models and part-ofspeech tagging, but they are not very explicit in the details that are needed for their application. We argue that it is not only the choice of the general model that determines the result of the tagger but also the various &quot;small&quot; decisions on alternatives. The aim of this paper is to give a detailed account of the techniques used in TnT. Additionally, we present results of the tagger on the NEGRA corpus (Brants et al., 1999) and the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993). The Penn Treebank results reported here for the Markov model approach are at least equivalent to those reported for the Maximum Entropy approach in (Ratnaparkhi, 1996). For a comparison to other taggers, the reader is referred to (Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999). 2 Architecture 2.1 The Underlying Model TnT uses second order Markov models for part-ofspeech tagging. The states of the model represent tags, outputs represent the words. Transition probabilities depend on the states, thus pairs of tags. Output probabilities only depend on the most recent cat
Brants, Skut, Uszkoreit, 1999
Thorsten Brants, Wojciech Skut, and Hans Uszkoreit. 1999. Syntactic annotation of a German newspaper corpus. In Proceedings of the ATALA Treebank Workshop, pages 69-76, Paris, France.
Eric Brill
A Corpus-Based Approach to Language Learning.
1993
Ph.D. Dissertation,
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania.
tation projects, who create valuable linguistic resources by a combination of automatic processing and human correction. For both applications, a tagger with the highest possible accuracy is required. The debate about which paradigm solves the part-of-speech tagging problem best is not finished. Recent comparisons of approaches that can be trained on corpora (van Halteren et al., 1998; Volk and Schneider, 1998) have shown that in most cases statistical aproaches (Cutting et al., 1992; Schmid, 1995; Ratnaparkhi, 1996) yield better results than finite-state, rule-based, or memory-based taggers (Brill, 1993; Daelemans et al., 1996). They are only surpassed by combinations of different systems, forming a &quot;voting tagger&quot;. Among the statistical approaches, the Maximum Entropy framework has a very strong position. Nevertheless, a recent independent comparison of 7 taggers (Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999) has shown that another approach even works better: Markov models combined with a good smoothing technique and with handling of unknown words. This tagger, TnT, not only yielded the highest accuracy, it also was the fastest both in training and tagging. The tagger comparison was organized as a &quot;blackbox 
Brill, 1993
Eric Brill. 1993. A Corpus-Based Approach to Language Learning. Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania.
Eugene Charniak
Curtis Hendrickson
Neil Jacobson
Mike Perkowitz
Equations for part-of-speech tagging.
1993
In Proceedings of the Eleventh National Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
784--789
AAAI Press/MIT Press.
Menlo Park:
t also was the fastest both in training and tagging. The tagger comparison was organized as a &quot;blackbox test&quot;: set the same task to every tagger and compare the outcomes. This paper describes the models and techniques used by TnT together with the implementation. The reader will be surprised how simple the underlying model is. The result of the tagger comparison seems to support the maxime &quot;the simplest is the best&quot;. However, in this paper we clarify a number of details that are omitted in major previous publications concerning tagging with Markov models. As two examples, (Rabiner, 1989) and (Charniak et al., 1993) give good overviews of the techniques and equations used for Markov models and part-ofspeech tagging, but they are not very explicit in the details that are needed for their application. We argue that it is not only the choice of the general model that determines the result of the tagger but also the various &quot;small&quot; decisions on alternatives. The aim of this paper is to give a detailed account of the techniques used in TnT. Additionally, we present results of the tagger on the NEGRA corpus (Brants et al., 1999) and the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993). The Penn Treebank results reported he
Charniak, Hendrickson, Jacobson, Perkowitz, 1993
Eugene Charniak, Curtis Hendrickson, Neil Jacobson, and Mike Perkowitz. 1993. Equations for part-of-speech tagging. In Proceedings of the Eleventh National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 784-789, Menlo Park: AAAI Press/MIT Press.
Doug Cutting
Julian Kupiec
Jan Pedersen
Penelope Sibun
A practical part-of-speech tagger.
1992
In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing (ACL),
133--140
tput to the next processing level, usually a parser. Furthermore, there is a large interest in part-ofspeech tagging for corpus annotation projects, who create valuable linguistic resources by a combination of automatic processing and human correction. For both applications, a tagger with the highest possible accuracy is required. The debate about which paradigm solves the part-of-speech tagging problem best is not finished. Recent comparisons of approaches that can be trained on corpora (van Halteren et al., 1998; Volk and Schneider, 1998) have shown that in most cases statistical aproaches (Cutting et al., 1992; Schmid, 1995; Ratnaparkhi, 1996) yield better results than finite-state, rule-based, or memory-based taggers (Brill, 1993; Daelemans et al., 1996). They are only surpassed by combinations of different systems, forming a &quot;voting tagger&quot;. Among the statistical approaches, the Maximum Entropy framework has a very strong position. Nevertheless, a recent independent comparison of 7 taggers (Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999) has shown that another approach even works better: Markov models combined with a good smoothing technique and with handling of unknown words. This tagger, TnT, not only yielded the 
Cutting, Kupiec, Pedersen, Sibun, 1992
Doug Cutting, Julian Kupiec, Jan Pedersen, and Penelope Sibun. 1992. A practical part-of-speech tagger. In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing (ACL), pages 133-140.
Walter Daelemans
Jakub Zavrel
Peter Berck
Steven Gillis
Mbt: A memory-based part of speech tagger-generator.
1996
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Very Large Corpora,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
ts, who create valuable linguistic resources by a combination of automatic processing and human correction. For both applications, a tagger with the highest possible accuracy is required. The debate about which paradigm solves the part-of-speech tagging problem best is not finished. Recent comparisons of approaches that can be trained on corpora (van Halteren et al., 1998; Volk and Schneider, 1998) have shown that in most cases statistical aproaches (Cutting et al., 1992; Schmid, 1995; Ratnaparkhi, 1996) yield better results than finite-state, rule-based, or memory-based taggers (Brill, 1993; Daelemans et al., 1996). They are only surpassed by combinations of different systems, forming a &quot;voting tagger&quot;. Among the statistical approaches, the Maximum Entropy framework has a very strong position. Nevertheless, a recent independent comparison of 7 taggers (Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999) has shown that another approach even works better: Markov models combined with a good smoothing technique and with handling of unknown words. This tagger, TnT, not only yielded the highest accuracy, it also was the fastest both in training and tagging. The tagger comparison was organized as a &quot;blackbox test&quot;: set the same task 
Daelemans, Zavrel, Berck, Gillis, 1996
Walter Daelemans, Jakub Zavrel, Peter Berck, and Steven Gillis. 1996. Mbt: A memory-based part of speech tagger-generator. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Very Large Corpora, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Mitchell Marcus
Beatrice Santorini
Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz
Building a large annotated corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics,
1993
19--2
s two examples, (Rabiner, 1989) and (Charniak et al., 1993) give good overviews of the techniques and equations used for Markov models and part-ofspeech tagging, but they are not very explicit in the details that are needed for their application. We argue that it is not only the choice of the general model that determines the result of the tagger but also the various &quot;small&quot; decisions on alternatives. The aim of this paper is to give a detailed account of the techniques used in TnT. Additionally, we present results of the tagger on the NEGRA corpus (Brants et al., 1999) and the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993). The Penn Treebank results reported here for the Markov model approach are at least equivalent to those reported for the Maximum Entropy approach in (Ratnaparkhi, 1996). For a comparison to other taggers, the reader is referred to (Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999). 2 Architecture 2.1 The Underlying Model TnT uses second order Markov models for part-ofspeech tagging. The states of the model represent tags, outputs represent the words. Transition probabilities depend on the states, thus pairs of tags. Output probabilities only depend on the most recent category. To be explicit, we calculate IT 1 arg
useful for annotation projects during the cleaning process, or during pre-processing, so the tagger can emit multiple tags if the best tag is classified as unreliable. 3.2 Tagging the Penn Treebank We use the Wall Street Journal as contained in the Penn Treebank for our experiments. The annotation consists of four parts: 1) a context-free structure augmented with traces to mark movement and discontinuous constituents, 2) phrasal categories that are annotated as node labels, 3) a small set of grammatical functions that are annotated as extensions to the node labels, and 4) part-of-speech tags (Marcus et al., 1993). This evaluation only uses the part-ofspeech annotation. The Wall Street Journal part of the Penn Treebank consists of approx. 50,000 sentences (1.2 million tokens). Tagging accuracies for the Penn Treebank are shown in table 5. Figure 6 shows the learning curve of the tagger, i.e., the accuracy depending on the amount of training data. Training length is the number of tokens used for training. Each training length was tested ten times. Training and test sets were disjoint, results are averaged. The training length is given on a logarithmic scale. As for the NEGRA corpus, tagging accuracy is 
Marcus, Santorini, Marcinkiewicz, 1993
Mitchell Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics, 19(2):313-330.
Lawrence R Rabiner
A tutorial on Hidden Markov Models and selected applications in speech recognition.
1989
In Proceedings of the IEEE,
77
2
257--285
 highest accuracy, it also was the fastest both in training and tagging. The tagger comparison was organized as a &quot;blackbox test&quot;: set the same task to every tagger and compare the outcomes. This paper describes the models and techniques used by TnT together with the implementation. The reader will be surprised how simple the underlying model is. The result of the tagger comparison seems to support the maxime &quot;the simplest is the best&quot;. However, in this paper we clarify a number of details that are omitted in major previous publications concerning tagging with Markov models. As two examples, (Rabiner, 1989) and (Charniak et al., 1993) give good overviews of the techniques and equations used for Markov models and part-ofspeech tagging, but they are not very explicit in the details that are needed for their application. We argue that it is not only the choice of the general model that determines the result of the tagger but also the various &quot;small&quot; decisions on alternatives. The aim of this paper is to give a detailed account of the techniques used in TnT. Additionally, we present results of the tagger on the NEGRA corpus (Brants et al., 1999) and the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993). The Penn 
re different from those not capitalized. The effect is larger for English, which only capitalizes proper names, and smaller for German, which capitalizes all nouns. We use flags ci that are true if wi is a capitalized word and false otherwise. These flags are added to the contextual probability distributions. Instead of P(t3lt1,t2) (12) we use P(t3, C3 Iti Cl, t2, C2) (13) and equations (3) to (5) are updated accordingly. This is equivalent to doubling the size of the tagset and using different tags depending on capitalization. 226 2.5 Beam Search The processing time of the Viterbi algorithm (Rabiner, 1989) can be reduced by introducing a beam search. Each state that receives a 6 value smaller than the largest 6 divided by some threshold value 0 is excluded from further processing. While the Viterbi algorithm is guaranteed to find the sequence of states with the highest probability, this is no longer true when beam search is added. Nevertheless, for practical purposes and the right choice of 0, there is virtually no difference between the algorithm with and without a beam. Empirically, a value of 0 = 1000 turned out to approximately double the speed of the tagger without affecting the accuracy. 
Rabiner, 1989
Lawrence R. Rabiner. 1989. A tutorial on Hidden Markov Models and selected applications in speech recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE, volume 77(2), pages 257-285.
Adwait Ratnaparkhi
A maximum entropy model for part-of-speech tagging.
1996
In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing EMNLP-96,
Philadelphia, PA.
sually a parser. Furthermore, there is a large interest in part-ofspeech tagging for corpus annotation projects, who create valuable linguistic resources by a combination of automatic processing and human correction. For both applications, a tagger with the highest possible accuracy is required. The debate about which paradigm solves the part-of-speech tagging problem best is not finished. Recent comparisons of approaches that can be trained on corpora (van Halteren et al., 1998; Volk and Schneider, 1998) have shown that in most cases statistical aproaches (Cutting et al., 1992; Schmid, 1995; Ratnaparkhi, 1996) yield better results than finite-state, rule-based, or memory-based taggers (Brill, 1993; Daelemans et al., 1996). They are only surpassed by combinations of different systems, forming a &quot;voting tagger&quot;. Among the statistical approaches, the Maximum Entropy framework has a very strong position. Nevertheless, a recent independent comparison of 7 taggers (Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999) has shown that another approach even works better: Markov models combined with a good smoothing technique and with handling of unknown words. This tagger, TnT, not only yielded the highest accuracy, it also was the 
are not very explicit in the details that are needed for their application. We argue that it is not only the choice of the general model that determines the result of the tagger but also the various &quot;small&quot; decisions on alternatives. The aim of this paper is to give a detailed account of the techniques used in TnT. Additionally, we present results of the tagger on the NEGRA corpus (Brants et al., 1999) and the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993). The Penn Treebank results reported here for the Markov model approach are at least equivalent to those reported for the Maximum Entropy approach in (Ratnaparkhi, 1996). For a comparison to other taggers, the reader is referred to (Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999). 2 Architecture 2.1 The Underlying Model TnT uses second order Markov models for part-ofspeech tagging. The states of the model represent tags, outputs represent the words. Transition probabilities depend on the states, thus pairs of tags. Output probabilities only depend on the most recent category. To be explicit, we calculate IT 1 argmax I fl P(ttiti_i,ti_2)P(wiltz) I P(tT+iltT) ti •••tT (1) for a given sequence of words w1 of length T. t1 tr are elements of the tagset, the additional 224 tags t_1, t
that the tagger not only determines tags, but also assigns probabilities. Figure 7 shows the accuracy when separating assignments with quotients larger and smaller than the threshold (hence reliable and unreliable assignments). Again, we find that accuracies for reliable assignments are much higher than for unreliable assignments. 3.3 Summary of Part-of-Speech Tagging Results Average part-of-speech tagging accuracy is between 96% and 97%, depending on language and tagset, which is at least on a par with state-of-the-art results found in the literature, possibly better. For the Penn Treebank, (Ratnaparkhi, 1996) reports an accuracy of 96.6% using the Maximum Entropy approach, our much simpler and therefore faster HMM approach delivers 96.7%. This comparison needs to be re-examined, since we use a ten-fold crossvalidation and averaging of results while Ratnaparkhi only makes one test run. The accuracy for known tokens is significantly higher than for unknown tokens. For the German newspaper data, results are 8.7% better when the word was seen before and therefore is in the lexicon, than when it was not seen before (97.7% vs. 89.0%). Accuracy for known tokens is high even with very small amounts of tra
ns: handling of start- and end-of-sequence, the exact smoothing technique, how to determine the weights for context probabilities, details on handling unknown words, and how to determine the weights for unknown words. Note that the decisions we made yield good results for both the German and the English Corpus. They do so for several other corpora as well. The architecture remains applicable to a large variety of languages. According to current tagger comparisons (van Halteren et al., 1998; Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999), and according to a comparsion of the results presented here with those in (Ratnaparkhi, 1996), the Maximum Entropy framework seems to be the only other approach yielding comparable results to the one presented here. It is a very interesting future research topic to determine the advantages of either of these approaches, to find the reason for their high accuracies, and to find a good combination of both. TnT is freely available to universities and related organizations for research purposes (see http://www.coli.uni-sb.derthorstenAnt). Acknowledgements Many thanks go to Hans Uszkoreit for his support during the development of TnT. Most of the work on TnT was carried out while the autho
Ratnaparkhi, 1996
Adwait Ratnaparkhi. 1996. A maximum entropy model for part-of-speech tagging. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing EMNLP-96, Philadelphia, PA.
Christer Samuelsson
Morphological tagging based entirely on Bayesian inference.
1993
In 9th Nordic Conference on Computational Linguistics NODALIDA-93,
Stockholm University, Stockholm,
best values for the As from all other ngrams in the corpus. Given the frequency counts for uni-, bi-, and trigrams, the weights can be very efficiently determined with a processing time linear in the number of different trigrams. The algorithm is given in figure 1. Note that subtracting 1 means taking unseen data into account. Without this subtraction the model would overfit the training data and would generally yield worse results. 2.3 Handling of Unknown Words Currently, the method of handling unknown words that seems to work best for inflected languages is a suffix analysis as proposed in (Samuelsson, 1993). Tag probabilities are set according to the word's ending. The suffix is a strong predictor for word classes, e.g., words in the Wall Street Journal part of the Penn Treebank ending in able are adjectives (.11) in 98% of the cases (e.g. fashionable, variable) , the rest of 2% are nouns (e.g. cable, variable). The probability distribution for a particular suffix is generated from all words in the training set that share the same suffix of some predefined maximum length. The term suffix as used here means &quot;final sequence of characters of a word&quot; which is not necessarily a linguistically meaning
ine the result of that expression to be 0. for i = m ... 0, using the maximum likelihood estimates P from frequencies in the lexicon, weights Oi and the initialization P(t) = P(t). (8) The maximum likelihood estimate for a suffix of length i is derived from corpus frequencies by f (t,In—i+17 • - • ln) f'(tiln_i+i, • • • .n)(9) J • • • I\n) For the Markov model, we need the inverse conditional probabilities P(1,2_1+1, ... /Tilt) which are obtained by Bayesian inversion. A theoretical motivated argumentation uses the standard deviation of the maximum likelihood probabilities for the weights 0, (Samuelsson, 1993). This leaves room for interpretation. 1) One has to identify a good value for in, the longest suffix used. The approach taken for TnT is the following: in depends on the word in question. We use the longest suffix that we can find in the training set (i.e., for which the frequency is greater than or equal to 1), but at most 10 characters. This is an empirically determined choice. 2) We use a context-independent approach for 0„ as we did for the contextual weights A. It turned out to be a good choice to set all 0, to the standard deviation of the unconditioned maximum likelihood probabilities 
Samuelsson, 1993
Christer Samuelsson. 1993. Morphological tagging based entirely on Bayesian inference. In 9th Nordic Conference on Computational Linguistics NODALIDA-93, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
Helmut Schmid
Improvements in part-ofspeech tagging with an application to German.
1995
In Helmut Feldweg and Erhard Hinrichts, editors, Lexikon und Text.
Niemeyer, Tübingen.
ssing level, usually a parser. Furthermore, there is a large interest in part-ofspeech tagging for corpus annotation projects, who create valuable linguistic resources by a combination of automatic processing and human correction. For both applications, a tagger with the highest possible accuracy is required. The debate about which paradigm solves the part-of-speech tagging problem best is not finished. Recent comparisons of approaches that can be trained on corpora (van Halteren et al., 1998; Volk and Schneider, 1998) have shown that in most cases statistical aproaches (Cutting et al., 1992; Schmid, 1995; Ratnaparkhi, 1996) yield better results than finite-state, rule-based, or memory-based taggers (Brill, 1993; Daelemans et al., 1996). They are only surpassed by combinations of different systems, forming a &quot;voting tagger&quot;. Among the statistical approaches, the Maximum Entropy framework has a very strong position. Nevertheless, a recent independent comparison of 7 taggers (Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999) has shown that another approach even works better: Markov models combined with a good smoothing technique and with handling of unknown words. This tagger, TnT, not only yielded the highest accura
Schmid, 1995
Helmut Schmid. 1995. Improvements in part-ofspeech tagging with an application to German. In Helmut Feldweg and Erhard Hinrichts, editors, Lexikon und Text. Niemeyer, Tübingen.
Wojciech Skut
Brigitte Krenn
Thorsten Brants
Hans Uszkoreit
An annotation scheme for free word order languages.
1997
In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing ANLP-97,
Washington, DC.
cessed. The tagger is allowed to assign exactly one tag to each token. We distinguish the overall accuracy, taking into account all tokens in the test corpus, and separate accuracies for known and unknown tokens. The latter are interesting, since usually unknown tokens are much more difficult to process than known tokens, for which a list of valid tags can be found in the lexicon. 3.1 Tagging the NEGRA corpus The German NEGRA corpus consists of 20,000 sentences (355,000 tokens) of newspaper texts (Frankfurter Rundschau) that are annotated with parts-ofspeech and predicate-argument structures (Skut et al., 1997). It was developed at the Saarland University in Saarbriicken2. Part of it was tagged at the IMS Stuttgart. This evaluation only uses the partof-speech annotation and ignores structural annotations. Tagging accuracies for the NEGRA corpus are shown in table 2. Figure 3 shows the learning curve of the tagger, i.e., the accuracy depending on the amount of training data. Training length is the number of tokens used for training. Each training length was tested ten times, training and test sets were randomly chosen and disjoint, results were averaged. The training length is given on a logarithmic 
Skut, Krenn, Brants, Uszkoreit, 1997
Wojciech Skut, Brigitte Krenn, Thorsten Brants, and Hans Uszkoreit. 1997. An annotation scheme for free word order languages. In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing ANLP-97, Washington, DC.
Hans van Halteren
Jakub Zavrel
Walter Daelemans
Improving data driven wordclass tagging by system combination.
1998
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics COLING-98,
491--497
Montreal, Canada.
van Halteren, Zavrel, Daelemans, 1998
Hans van Halteren, Jakub Zavrel, and Walter Daelemans. 1998. Improving data driven wordclass tagging by system combination. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics COLING-98, pages 491-497, Montreal, Canada.
Martin Volk
Gerold Schneider
Comparing a statistical and a rule-based tagger for german.
1998
In Proceedings of KONVENS-98,
125--137
Bonn.
ue or ambiguous) part-ofspeech tag to each token in the input and passes its output to the next processing level, usually a parser. Furthermore, there is a large interest in part-ofspeech tagging for corpus annotation projects, who create valuable linguistic resources by a combination of automatic processing and human correction. For both applications, a tagger with the highest possible accuracy is required. The debate about which paradigm solves the part-of-speech tagging problem best is not finished. Recent comparisons of approaches that can be trained on corpora (van Halteren et al., 1998; Volk and Schneider, 1998) have shown that in most cases statistical aproaches (Cutting et al., 1992; Schmid, 1995; Ratnaparkhi, 1996) yield better results than finite-state, rule-based, or memory-based taggers (Brill, 1993; Daelemans et al., 1996). They are only surpassed by combinations of different systems, forming a &quot;voting tagger&quot;. Among the statistical approaches, the Maximum Entropy framework has a very strong position. Nevertheless, a recent independent comparison of 7 taggers (Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999) has shown that another approach even works better: Markov models combined with a good smoothing technique a
Volk, Schneider, 1998
Martin Volk and Gerold Schneider. 1998. Comparing a statistical and a rule-based tagger for german. In Proceedings of KONVENS-98, pages 125-137, Bonn.
Jakub Zavrel
Walter Daelemans
Evaluatie van part-of-speech taggers voor het corpus gesproken nederlands. CGN technical report,
1999
Katholieke Universiteit Brabant,
Tilburg.
 is not finished. Recent comparisons of approaches that can be trained on corpora (van Halteren et al., 1998; Volk and Schneider, 1998) have shown that in most cases statistical aproaches (Cutting et al., 1992; Schmid, 1995; Ratnaparkhi, 1996) yield better results than finite-state, rule-based, or memory-based taggers (Brill, 1993; Daelemans et al., 1996). They are only surpassed by combinations of different systems, forming a &quot;voting tagger&quot;. Among the statistical approaches, the Maximum Entropy framework has a very strong position. Nevertheless, a recent independent comparison of 7 taggers (Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999) has shown that another approach even works better: Markov models combined with a good smoothing technique and with handling of unknown words. This tagger, TnT, not only yielded the highest accuracy, it also was the fastest both in training and tagging. The tagger comparison was organized as a &quot;blackbox test&quot;: set the same task to every tagger and compare the outcomes. This paper describes the models and techniques used by TnT together with the implementation. The reader will be surprised how simple the underlying model is. The result of the tagger comparison seems to support the maxime &quot;the s
ue that it is not only the choice of the general model that determines the result of the tagger but also the various &quot;small&quot; decisions on alternatives. The aim of this paper is to give a detailed account of the techniques used in TnT. Additionally, we present results of the tagger on the NEGRA corpus (Brants et al., 1999) and the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993). The Penn Treebank results reported here for the Markov model approach are at least equivalent to those reported for the Maximum Entropy approach in (Ratnaparkhi, 1996). For a comparison to other taggers, the reader is referred to (Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999). 2 Architecture 2.1 The Underlying Model TnT uses second order Markov models for part-ofspeech tagging. The states of the model represent tags, outputs represent the words. Transition probabilities depend on the states, thus pairs of tags. Output probabilities only depend on the most recent category. To be explicit, we calculate IT 1 argmax I fl P(ttiti_i,ti_2)P(wiltz) I P(tT+iltT) ti •••tT (1) for a given sequence of words w1 of length T. t1 tr are elements of the tagset, the additional 224 tags t_1, to, and t7-,±1 are beginning-of-sequence and end-of-sequence markers. Using these additional
 to the implementor. The rather large amount of freedom was not handled in detail in previous publications: handling of start- and end-of-sequence, the exact smoothing technique, how to determine the weights for context probabilities, details on handling unknown words, and how to determine the weights for unknown words. Note that the decisions we made yield good results for both the German and the English Corpus. They do so for several other corpora as well. The architecture remains applicable to a large variety of languages. According to current tagger comparisons (van Halteren et al., 1998; Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999), and according to a comparsion of the results presented here with those in (Ratnaparkhi, 1996), the Maximum Entropy framework seems to be the only other approach yielding comparable results to the one presented here. It is a very interesting future research topic to determine the advantages of either of these approaches, to find the reason for their high accuracies, and to find a good combination of both. TnT is freely available to universities and related organizations for research purposes (see http://www.coli.uni-sb.derthorstenAnt). Acknowledgements Many thanks go to Hans Uszkoreit for his
Zavrel, Daelemans, 1999
Jakub Zavrel and Walter Daelemans. 1999. Evaluatie van part-of-speech taggers voor het corpus gesproken nederlands. CGN technical report, Katholieke Universiteit Brabant, Tilburg.
