Linguistic Knowledge can Improve Information Retrieval
William A. Woods and Lawrence A. Bookman* and Ann Houston and
Robert J. Kuhns and Paul Martin and Stephen Green
Sun Microsystems Laboratories
1 Network Drive
Burlington, MA 01803
{ William.Woods,Ann. Houston,Rob ert .Kuhns ,Paul. Martin,Stephen.Green} ©east sun.com
Abstract
This paper describes the results of some experiments
using a new approach to information access that
combines techniques from natural language processing and knowledge representation with a penaltybased technique for relevance estimation and passage
retrieval. Unlike many attempts to combine natural
language processing with information retrieval, these
results show substantial benefit from using linguistic
knowledge.
1 Introduction
An online information seeker often fails to find what
is wanted because the words used in the request are
different from the words used in the relevant material. Moreover, the searcher usually spends a significant amount of time reading retrieved material in order to determine whether it contains the information
sought. To address these problems, a system has
been developed at Sun Microsystems Laboratories
(Ambroziak and Woods, 1998) that uses techniques
from natural language processing and knowledge
representation, with a technique for dynamic passage selection and scoring, to significantly improve
retrieval performance. This system is able to locate
specific passages in the indexed material where the
requested information appears to be, and to score
those passages with a penalty-based score that is
highly correlated with the likelihood that they contain relevant information. This ability, which we call
&quot;Precision Content Retrieval&quot; is achieved by combining a system for Conceptual Indexing with an
algorithm for Relaxation-Ranking Specific Passage
Retrieval.
In this paper, we show how linguistic knowledge is
used to improve search effectiveness in this system.
This is of particular interest, since many previous attempts to use linguistic knowledge to improve information retrieval have met with little or mixed success (Fagan, 1989; Lewis and Sparck Jones, 1996;
Sparck Jones, 1998; Varile and Zampolli, 1997;
Voorhees, 1993; Mandala et al., 1999) (but see the
latter for some successes as well).
* Lawrence Bookman is now at Torrent Systems, Inc.
2 Conceptual Indexing
The conceptual indexing and retrieval system used
for these experiments automatically extracts words
and phrases from unrestricted text and organizes
them into a semantic network that integrates syntactic, semantic, and morphological relationships.
The resulting conceptual taxonomy (Woods, 1997) is
used by a specific passage-retrieval algorithm to deal
with many paraphrase relationships and to find specific passages of text where the information sought is
likely to occur. It uses a lexicon containing syntactic, semantic, and morphological information about
words, word senses, and phrases to provide a base
source of semantic and morphological relationships
that are used to organize the taxonomy. In addition, it uses an extensive system of knowledge-based
morphological rules and functions to analyze words
that are not already in its lexicon, in order to construct new lexical entries for previously unknown
words (Woods, 2000). In addition to rules for handling derived and inflected forms of known words,
the system includes rules for lexical compounds and
rules that are capable of making reasonable guesses
for totally unknown words.
A pilot version of this indexing and retrieval
system, implemented in Lisp, uses a collection of
approximately 1200 knowledge-based morphological rules to extend a core lexicon of approximately
39,000 words to give coverage that exceeds that of an
English lexicon of more than 80,000 base forms (or
150,000 base plus inflected forms). Later versions
of the conceptual indexing and retrieval system, implemented in C++, use a lexicon of approximately
150,000 word forms that is automatically generated
by the Lisp-based morphological analysis from its
core lexicon and an input word list. The base lexicon
is extended further by an extensive name dictionary
and by further morphological analysis of unknown
words at indexing time. This paper will describe
some experiments using several versions of this system. In particular, it will focus on the role that the
linguistic knowledge sources play in its operation.
The lexicon used by the conceptual indexing system contains syntactic information that can be used
262
for the analysis of phrases, as well as morphological and semantic information that is used to relate
more specific concepts to more general concepts in
the conceptual taxonomy. This information is integrated into the conceptual taxonomy by considering
base forms of words to subsume their derived and
inflected forms (&quot;root subsumption&quot;) and more general terms to subsume more specific terms. The system uses these relationships as the basis for inferring subsumption relationships between more general phrases and more specific phrases according to
the intensional subsumption logic of Woods (Woods,
1991).
The largest base lexicon used by this system currently contains semantic subsumption information
for something in excess of 15,000 words. This information consists of basic &quot;kind of&quot; and &quot;instance of&quot;
information such as the fact that book is a kind of
document and washing is a kind of cleaning. The
lexicon also records morphological roots and affixes
for words that are derived or inflected forms of other
words, and information about different word senses
and their interrelationships. For example, the conceptual indexing system is able to categorize becomes
black as a kind of color change because becomes is an
inflected form of become, become is a kind of change,
and black is a color. Similarly, color disruption is
recognized as a kind of color change, because the
system recognizes disruption as a derived form of
disrupt, which is known in the lexicon to be a kind
of damage, which is known to be a kind of change.
When using root subsumption as a technique for
information retrieval, it is important to have a core
lexicon that knows correct morphological analyses
for words that the rules would otherwise analyze incorrectly. For example, the following are some examples of words that could be analyzed incorrectly if
the correct interpretations were not specified in the
lexicon:
delegate (de+leg+ate) take the legs from
caress (car + ess) female car
cashier (cashy + er) more wealthy
daredevil (dared + evil) serious risk
lacerate (lace + rate) speed of tatting
pantry (pant + ry) heavy breathing
pigeon (pig + eon) the age of peccaries
ratify (rat + ify) infest with rodents
infantry (infant + ry) childish behavior
Although they are not always as humorous as the
above examples, there are over 3,000 words in the
core lexicon of 39,000 English words that would receive false morphological analyses like the above examples, if the words were not already in the lexicon.
3 Relaxation Ranking and Specific
Passage Retrieval
The system we are evaluating uses a technique called
&quot;relaxation ranking&quot; to find specific passages where
as many as possible of the different elements of
a query occur near each other, preferably in the
same form and word order and preferably closer
together. Such passages are ranked by a penalty
score that measures the degree of deviation from an
exact match of the requested phrase, with smaller
penalties being preferred. Differences in morphological form and formal subsumption of index terms
by query terms introduce small penalties, while intervening words, unexplained permutations of word
order, and crossing sentence boundaries introduce
more significant penalties. Elements of a query that
cannot be found nearby introduce substantial penalties that depend on the syntactic categories of the
missing words.
When the conceptual indexing system is presented
with a query, the relaxation-ranking retrieval algorithm searches through the conceptual taxonomy for
appropriately related concepts and uses the positions of those concepts in the indexed material to
find specific passages that are likely to address the
information needs of the request. This search can
find relationships from base forms of words to derived forms and from more general terms to more
specific terms, by following paths in the conceptual
taxonomy.
For example, the following is a passage retrieved
by this system, when applied to the UNIX® operating system online documentation (the &quot;man pages&quot;):
Query: print a message from the mail tool
6. -2.84 print mail mail mailtool
Print sends copies of all the selected mail
items to your default printer. If there are
no selected items, mailtool sends copies of
those items you are currently...
The indicated passage is ranked 6th in a returned
list of found passages, indicated by the 6 in the above
display. The number -2.84 is the penalty score assigned to the passage, and the subsequent words
print, mail, mail, and mailtool indicate the words
in the text that are matched to the corresponding
content words in the input query. In this case, print
is matched to print, message to mail, mail to mail,
and tool to mailtool, respectively. This is followed
by the content of the actual passage located. The
information provided in these hit displays gives the
information seeker a clear idea of why the passage
was retrieved and enables the searcher to quickly
skip down the hit list with little time spent looking
at irrelevant passages. In this case, it was easy to
263
identify that the 6th ranked hit was the best one and
contained the relevant information.
The retrieval of this passage involved use of a semantic subsumption relationship to match message
to mail, because the lexical entry for mail recorded
that it was a kind of message. It used a morphological root subsumption to match tool to mailtool
because the morphological analyzer analyzed the unknown word mailtool as a compound of mail and tool
and recorded that its root was tool and that it was
a kind of tool modified by mail. Taking away the
ability to morphologically analyze unknown words
would have blocked the retrieval of this passage,
as would eliminating the lexical subsumption entry
that recorded mail as a kind of message.
Like other approaches to passage retrieval
(Kaszldel and Zobel, 1997; Salton et al., 1993;
Callan, 1994), the relaxation-ranking retrieval algorithm identifies relevant passages rather than simply
identifying whole documents. However, unlike approaches that involve segmenting the material into
paragraphs or other small passages before indexing,
this algorithm dynamically constructs relevant passages in response to requests. When responding to
a request, it uses information in the index about positions of concepts in the text to identify relevant
passages. In response to a single request, identified
passages may range in size from a single word or
phrase to several sentences or paragraphs, depending on how much context is required to capture the
various elements of the request.
In a user interface to the specific passage retrieval
system, retrieved passages are reported to the user
in increasing order of penalty, together with the rank
number, penalty score, information about which target terms match the corresponding query terms, and
the content of the identified passage with some surrounding context as illustrated above. In one version
of this technology, results are presented in a hypertext interface that allows the user to click on any
of the presented items to see that passage in its entire context in the source document. In addition,
the user can be presented with a display of portions
of the conceptual taxonomy related to the terms in
the request. This frequently reveals useful generalizations of the request that would find additional
relevant information, and it also conveys an understanding of what concepts have been found in the
material that will be matched by the query terms.
For example, in one experiment, searching the online documentation for the Emacs text editor, the
request jump to end of file resulted in feedback showing that jump was classified as a kind of move in the
conceptual taxonomy. This led to a reformulated
request, move to end of file, which successfully retrieved the passage go to end of buffer.
4 Experimental Evaluation
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of the above
techniques, a set of 90 queries was collected from
a naive user of the UNIX operating system, 84 of
which could be answered from the online documentation known as the man pages. A set of &quot;correct&quot;
answers for each of these 84 queries was manually determined by an independent UNIX operating system
expert, and a snapshot of the man pages collection
was captured and indexed for retrieval. In order
to compare this methodology with classical document retrieval techniques, we assign a ranking score
to each document equal to the ranking score of the
best ranked passage that it contains.
In rating the performance of a given method, we
compute average recall and precision values at 10
retrieved documents, and we also compute a &quot;success rate&quot; which is simply the percentage of queries
for which an acceptable answer occurs in the top
ten hits. The success rate is the principal factor
on which we base our evaluations, since for this application, the user is not interested in subsequent
answers once an acceptable answer has been found,
and finding one answer for each of two requests is a
substantially better result than finding two answers
to one request and none for another.
These experiments were conducted using an experimental retrieval system that combined a Lispbased language processing stage with a C++ implementation of a conceptual indexer. The linguistic knowledge sources used in these experiments included a core lexicon of approximately 18,000 words,
a substantial set of morphological rules, and specialized morphological algorithms covering inflections, prefixes, suffixes, lexical compounding, and
a variety of special forms, including numbers, ordinals, Roman numerals, dates, phone numbers, and
acronyms. In addition, they made use of a lexical
subsumption taxonomy of approximately 3000 lexical subsumption relations, and a small set of semantic entailment axioms (e.g., display entails see,
but is not a kind of see). This system is described
in (Woods, 1997). The database was a snapshot of
the local man pages (frozen at the time of the experiment so that it wouldn't change during the experiment), consisting of approximately 1800 files of
varying lengths and constituting a total of approximately 10 megabytes of text.
Table 1 shows the results of comparing three versions of this technology with a textbook implementation of the standard tfidf algorithm (Salton, 1989)
and with the SearchltTM search application developed at Sun Microsystems, Inc., which combines a
264
Table 1: A comparison of different retrieval techni ues
System Success Rate Recall Precision
(10 does) (10 docs)
tf idf 28.6% 14.8% 2.9%
SearchIt system 44.0% 28.5% 7.4%
Recall II 60.7% 38.6% 7.3%
w/o morph 50.0% not measured not measured
w/o knowledge 42.9% not measured not measured
simple morphological query expansion with a stateof-the-art commercial search engine. In the table,
Recall II refers to the full conceptual indexing and
search system with all of its knowledge sources and
rules. The line labeled &quot;w/o morph&quot; refers to this
system with its dynamic morphological rules turned
off, and the line labeled &quot;w/o knowledge&quot; refers to
this system with all of its knowledge sources and
rules turned off. The table presents the success
rate and the measured recall and precision values
for 10 retrieved documents. We measured recall and
precision at the 10 document level because internal studies of searching behavior had shown that
users tended to give up if an answer was not found
in the first ten ranked hits. We measured success
rate, rather than recall and precision, for our ablation studies, because standard recall and precision
measures are not sensitive to the distinction between
finding multiple answers to a single request versus
finding at least one answer for more requests.
5 Discussion
Table 1 shows that for this task, the relaxationranking passage retrieval algorithm without its supplementary knowledge sources (Recall II w/o knowledge) is roughly comparable in performance (42.9%
versus 44.0% success rate) to a state-of-the-art commercial search engine (SearchIt) at the pure document retrieval task (neglecting the added benefit of
locating the specific passages). Adding the knowledge in the core lexicon (which includes morphological relationships, semantic subsumption axioms,
and entailment relationships), but without morphological analysis of unknown words (Recall II w/o
morph), significantly improves these results (from
42.9% to 50.0%). Further adding the morphological analysis capability that automatically analyzes
unknown words (deriving additional morphological
relationships and some semantic subsumption relationships) significantly improves that result (from
50.0% to 60.7%). In contrast, we found that adding
the same semantic subsumption relationships to the
commercial search engine, using its provided thesaurus capability degraded its results, and results
were still degraded when we added only those facts
that we knew would help find relevant documents.
It turned out that the additional relevant documents
found were more than offset by additional irrelevant
documents that were also ranked more highly.
6 Anecdotal Evaluation of Specific
Passage Retrieval Benefits
As mentioned above, comparing the relaxationranking algorithm with document retrieval systems
measures only a part of the benefit of the specific
passage retrieval methodology. Fully evaluating the
quality and ranking of the retrieved passages involves a great many subtleties. However, two informal evaluations have been conducted that shed
some light on the benefits.
The first of these was a pilot study of the technology at a telecommunications company. In that
study, one user found that she could use a single
query to the conceptual indexing system to find both
of the items of information necessary to complete a
task that formerly required searching two separate
databases. The conclusion of that study was that the
concept retrieval technology performs well enough to
be useful to a person talking live with a customer.
It was observed that the returned hits can be compared with one another easily and quickly by eye,
and attention is taken directly to the relevant content of a large document. The automatic indexing
was considered a plus compared with manual methods of content indexing. It was observed that an area
of great potential may be in a form of knowledge
management that involves organizing and providing
intelligent access to small, unrelated &quot;nuggets&quot; of
textual knowledge that are not amenable to conventional database archival or categorization.
A second experiment was conducted by the Human Resources Webmaster of a high-tech company,
an experienced user of search engines who used this
technology to index his company's internal HR web
site. He then measured the time it took him to process 15 typical HR requests, first using conventional
search tools that he had available, and then using
the Conceptual Indexing technology. In both cases,
he measured the time it took him to either find the
answer or to conclude that the answer wasn't in
the indexed material. His measured times for the
total suite were 55 minutes using the conventional
265
tools and 11 minutes using the conceptual indexing technology. Of course, this was an uncontrolled
experiment, and there is some potential that information learned from searching with the traditional
tools (which were apparently used first) might have
provided some benefit when using the conceptual indexing technology. However, the fact that he found
things with the latter that he did not find with the
former and the magnitude of the time difference suggests that there is an effect, albeit perhaps not as
great as the measurements. As a result of this experience, he concluded that he would expect many
users to take much longer to find materials or give
up, when using the traditional tools. He anticipated
that after finding some initial materials, more time
would be required, as users would end up having
to call people for additional information. He estimated that users could spend up to an hour trying
to get the information they needed...having to call
someone, wait to make contact and finally get the
information they needed. Using the conceptual indexing search engine, he expected that these times
would be at least halved.
7 Conclusion
We have described some experiments using linguistic knowledge in an information retrieval system in which passages within texts are dynamically found in response to a query and are scored
and ranked based on a relaxation of constraints.
This is a different approach from previous methods of passage retrieval and from previous attempts
to use linguistic knowledge in information retrieval.
These experiments show that linguistic knowledge
can significantly improve information retrieval performance when incorporated into a knowledge-based
relaxation-ranking algorithm for specific passage retrieval.
The linguistic knowledge considered here includes
the use of morphological relationships between
words, taxonomic relationships between concepts,
and general semantic entailment relationships between words and concepts. We have shown that the
combination of these three knowledge sources can
significantly improve performance in finding appropriate answers to specific queries when incorporated
into a relaxation-ranking algorithm. It appears that
the penalty-based relaxation-ranking algorithm figures crucially in this success, since the addition of
such linguistic knowledge to traditional information
retrieval models typically degrades retrieval performance rather than improving it, a pattern that was
borne out in our own experiments.
Acknowledgments
Many other people have been involved in creating
the conceptual indexing and retrieval system described here. These include: Gary Adams, Jacek
Ambroziak, Cookie Callahan, Chris Colby, Jim
Flowers, Ellen Hays, Patrick Martin, Peter Norvig,
Tony Passera, Philip Resnik, Robert Sproull, and
Mark Torrance.
Sun, Sun Microsystems, and SearchIt are trademarks or registered trademarks of Sun Microsystems, Inc. in the U.S. and other countries.
umx is a registered trademark in the United
States and other countries, exclusively licensed
through X/Open Company, Ltd. UNIX est une
marque enregistree aux Etats-Unis et dans d'autres
pays et licenciee exclusivement par X/Open Company Ltd.
References
Jacek Ambroziak and William A. Woods. 1998.
Natural language technology in precision content
retrieval. In International Conference on Natural
Language Processing and Industrial Applications,
Moncton, New Brunswick, Canada, August.
www.sun.com/research/techrep/1998/abstract69.html.
Jamie P. Callan. 1994. Passage-level evidence in
document retrieval. SIGIR, pages 302-309.
J. L. Fagan. 1989. The effectiveness of a nonsyntactic approach to automatic phrase indexing for document retrieval. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science, 40(2):115-132, March.
Marcin Kaszldel and Justin Zobel. 1997. Passage
retrieval revisited. SIGIR, pages 302-309.
David D. Lewis and Karen Sparck Jones. 1996. Natural language processing for information retrieval.
CA CM, 39(1):92-101.
Rila Mandala, Ta.kenobu Tokunaga, and Hozumi
Tanaka. 1999. Combining multiple evidence from
different types of thesaurus for query expansion.
In Proceedings on the 22nd annual international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval. ACM-SIGIR.
Gerald Salton, James Allan, and Chris Buckley.
1993. Approaches to passage retrieval in full text
information systems. SIGIR, pages 49-58.
Gerard Salton. 1989. Automatic Text Processing.
Addison Wesley, Reading, MA.
Karen Sparck Jones. 1998. A look back and a look
forward. SIGIR, pages 13-29.
Giovanni Varile and Antonio Zampolli, editors.
1997. Survey of the State of the Art in Human
Language Technology. Cambridge Univ. Press.
Ellen M. Voorhees. 1993. Using wordnet to disambiguate word senses for text retrieval. In Proceedings of 16th ACM SIGIR Conference. ACMSIGIR.
William A. Woods. 1991. Understanding subsumpdon and taxonomy: A framework for progress.
In John Sowa, editor, Principles of Semantic
266
Networks: Explorations in the Representation of
Knowledge, pages 45-94. Morgan Kaufmann, San
Mateo, CA.
William A. Woods. 1997. Conceptual indexing:
A better way to organize knowledge. Technical
Report SMLI TR-97-61, Sun Microsystems
Laboratories, Mountain View, CA, April.
www.sun.com/research/techrep/1997/abstract61.html.
William A. Woods. 2000. Aggressive morphology
for robust lexical coverage. In (these proceedings).
267
Linguistic Knowledge can Improve Information Retrieval
A Woods A Bookman Houston
J Kuhns Martin Green
Sun Microsystems Laboratories 1 Network Drive
Burlington, MA 01803
William.Woods©eastsun.com
Ann.Houston©eastsun.com
Robert.Kuhns©eastsun.com
Paul.Martin©eastsun.com
Stephen.Green©eastsun.com
This paper describes the results of some experiments using a new approach to information access that combines techniques from natural language processing and knowledge representation with a penaltybased technique for relevance estimation and passage retrieval. Unlike many attempts to combine natural language processing with information retrieval, these results show substantial benefit from using linguistic knowledge.
Many other
people have been involved in creating the conceptual indexing and retrieval system described here. These include: Gary Adams,
Jacek Ambroziak, Cookie Callahan, Chris Colby, Jim Flowers, Ellen Hays, Patrick
other, 
Many other people have been involved in creating the conceptual indexing and retrieval system described here. These include: Gary Adams, Jacek Ambroziak, Cookie Callahan, Chris Colby, Jim Flowers, Ellen Hays, Patrick Martin, Peter Norvig, Tony Passera, Philip Resnik, Robert Sproull, and Mark Torrance.
Sun Sun
Microsystems, and SearchIt are trademarks or registered trademarks of Sun Microsystems, Inc. in the U.S. and other countries.
Sun, 
Sun, Sun Microsystems, and SearchIt are trademarks or registered trademarks of Sun Microsystems, Inc. in the U.S. and other countries.
Jacek Ambroziak
William A Woods
Natural language technology in precision content retrieval.
1998
In International Conference on Natural Language Processing and Industrial Applications,
Moncton, New Brunswick, Canada,
ge retrieval. Unlike many attempts to combine natural language processing with information retrieval, these results show substantial benefit from using linguistic knowledge. 1 Introduction An online information seeker often fails to find what is wanted because the words used in the request are different from the words used in the relevant material. Moreover, the searcher usually spends a significant amount of time reading retrieved material in order to determine whether it contains the information sought. To address these problems, a system has been developed at Sun Microsystems Laboratories (Ambroziak and Woods, 1998) that uses techniques from natural language processing and knowledge representation, with a technique for dynamic passage selection and scoring, to significantly improve retrieval performance. This system is able to locate specific passages in the indexed material where the requested information appears to be, and to score those passages with a penalty-based score that is highly correlated with the likelihood that they contain relevant information. This ability, which we call &quot;Precision Content Retrieval&quot; is achieved by combining a system for Conceptual Indexing with an algorithm for Relaxatio
Ambroziak, Woods, 1998
Jacek Ambroziak and William A. Woods. 1998. Natural language technology in precision content retrieval. In International Conference on Natural Language Processing and Industrial Applications, Moncton, New Brunswick, Canada, August. www.sun.com/research/techrep/1998/abstract69.html.
Jamie P Callan
Passage-level evidence in document retrieval.
1994
302--309
SIGIR,
for mail recorded that it was a kind of message. It used a morphological root subsumption to match tool to mailtool because the morphological analyzer analyzed the unknown word mailtool as a compound of mail and tool and recorded that its root was tool and that it was a kind of tool modified by mail. Taking away the ability to morphologically analyze unknown words would have blocked the retrieval of this passage, as would eliminating the lexical subsumption entry that recorded mail as a kind of message. Like other approaches to passage retrieval (Kaszldel and Zobel, 1997; Salton et al., 1993; Callan, 1994), the relaxation-ranking retrieval algorithm identifies relevant passages rather than simply identifying whole documents. However, unlike approaches that involve segmenting the material into paragraphs or other small passages before indexing, this algorithm dynamically constructs relevant passages in response to requests. When responding to a request, it uses information in the index about positions of concepts in the text to identify relevant passages. In response to a single request, identified passages may range in size from a single word or phrase to several sentences or paragraphs, depend
Callan, 1994
Jamie P. Callan. 1994. Passage-level evidence in document retrieval. SIGIR, pages 302-309.
J L Fagan
The effectiveness of a nonsyntactic approach to automatic phrase indexing for document retrieval.
1989
Journal of the American Society for Information Science,
40--2
s to be, and to score those passages with a penalty-based score that is highly correlated with the likelihood that they contain relevant information. This ability, which we call &quot;Precision Content Retrieval&quot; is achieved by combining a system for Conceptual Indexing with an algorithm for Relaxation-Ranking Specific Passage Retrieval. In this paper, we show how linguistic knowledge is used to improve search effectiveness in this system. This is of particular interest, since many previous attempts to use linguistic knowledge to improve information retrieval have met with little or mixed success (Fagan, 1989; Lewis and Sparck Jones, 1996; Sparck Jones, 1998; Varile and Zampolli, 1997; Voorhees, 1993; Mandala et al., 1999) (but see the latter for some successes as well). * Lawrence Bookman is now at Torrent Systems, Inc. 2 Conceptual Indexing The conceptual indexing and retrieval system used for these experiments automatically extracts words and phrases from unrestricted text and organizes them into a semantic network that integrates syntactic, semantic, and morphological relationships. The resulting conceptual taxonomy (Woods, 1997) is used by a specific passage-retrieval algorithm to deal with m
Fagan, 1989
J. L. Fagan. 1989. The effectiveness of a nonsyntactic approach to automatic phrase indexing for document retrieval. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 40(2):115-132, March.
Marcin Kaszldel
Justin Zobel
Passage retrieval revisited.
1997
302--309
SIGIR,
tch message to mail, because the lexical entry for mail recorded that it was a kind of message. It used a morphological root subsumption to match tool to mailtool because the morphological analyzer analyzed the unknown word mailtool as a compound of mail and tool and recorded that its root was tool and that it was a kind of tool modified by mail. Taking away the ability to morphologically analyze unknown words would have blocked the retrieval of this passage, as would eliminating the lexical subsumption entry that recorded mail as a kind of message. Like other approaches to passage retrieval (Kaszldel and Zobel, 1997; Salton et al., 1993; Callan, 1994), the relaxation-ranking retrieval algorithm identifies relevant passages rather than simply identifying whole documents. However, unlike approaches that involve segmenting the material into paragraphs or other small passages before indexing, this algorithm dynamically constructs relevant passages in response to requests. When responding to a request, it uses information in the index about positions of concepts in the text to identify relevant passages. In response to a single request, identified passages may range in size from a single word or phrase to sev
Kaszldel, Zobel, 1997
Marcin Kaszldel and Justin Zobel. 1997. Passage retrieval revisited. SIGIR, pages 302-309.
David D Lewis
Karen Sparck Jones
Natural language processing for information retrieval.
1996
CA CM,
39--1
Lewis, Jones, 1996
David D. Lewis and Karen Sparck Jones. 1996. Natural language processing for information retrieval. CA CM, 39(1):92-101.
Rila Mandala
Ta kenobu Tokunaga
Hozumi Tanaka
Combining multiple evidence from different types of thesaurus for query expansion.
1999
In Proceedings on the 22nd annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval.
ACM-SIGIR.
ood that they contain relevant information. This ability, which we call &quot;Precision Content Retrieval&quot; is achieved by combining a system for Conceptual Indexing with an algorithm for Relaxation-Ranking Specific Passage Retrieval. In this paper, we show how linguistic knowledge is used to improve search effectiveness in this system. This is of particular interest, since many previous attempts to use linguistic knowledge to improve information retrieval have met with little or mixed success (Fagan, 1989; Lewis and Sparck Jones, 1996; Sparck Jones, 1998; Varile and Zampolli, 1997; Voorhees, 1993; Mandala et al., 1999) (but see the latter for some successes as well). * Lawrence Bookman is now at Torrent Systems, Inc. 2 Conceptual Indexing The conceptual indexing and retrieval system used for these experiments automatically extracts words and phrases from unrestricted text and organizes them into a semantic network that integrates syntactic, semantic, and morphological relationships. The resulting conceptual taxonomy (Woods, 1997) is used by a specific passage-retrieval algorithm to deal with many paraphrase relationships and to find specific passages of text where the information sought is likely to occur. 
Mandala, Tokunaga, Tanaka, 1999
Rila Mandala, Ta.kenobu Tokunaga, and Hozumi Tanaka. 1999. Combining multiple evidence from different types of thesaurus for query expansion. In Proceedings on the 22nd annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval. ACM-SIGIR.
Gerald Salton
James Allan
Chris Buckley
Approaches to passage retrieval in full text information systems.
1993
49--58
SIGIR,
se the lexical entry for mail recorded that it was a kind of message. It used a morphological root subsumption to match tool to mailtool because the morphological analyzer analyzed the unknown word mailtool as a compound of mail and tool and recorded that its root was tool and that it was a kind of tool modified by mail. Taking away the ability to morphologically analyze unknown words would have blocked the retrieval of this passage, as would eliminating the lexical subsumption entry that recorded mail as a kind of message. Like other approaches to passage retrieval (Kaszldel and Zobel, 1997; Salton et al., 1993; Callan, 1994), the relaxation-ranking retrieval algorithm identifies relevant passages rather than simply identifying whole documents. However, unlike approaches that involve segmenting the material into paragraphs or other small passages before indexing, this algorithm dynamically constructs relevant passages in response to requests. When responding to a request, it uses information in the index about positions of concepts in the text to identify relevant passages. In response to a single request, identified passages may range in size from a single word or phrase to several sentences or par
Salton, Allan, Buckley, 1993
Gerald Salton, James Allan, and Chris Buckley. 1993. Approaches to passage retrieval in full text information systems. SIGIR, pages 49-58.
Gerard Salton
Automatic Text Processing.
1989
Addison Wesley,
Reading, MA.
omy of approximately 3000 lexical subsumption relations, and a small set of semantic entailment axioms (e.g., display entails see, but is not a kind of see). This system is described in (Woods, 1997). The database was a snapshot of the local man pages (frozen at the time of the experiment so that it wouldn't change during the experiment), consisting of approximately 1800 files of varying lengths and constituting a total of approximately 10 megabytes of text. Table 1 shows the results of comparing three versions of this technology with a textbook implementation of the standard tfidf algorithm (Salton, 1989) and with the SearchltTM search application developed at Sun Microsystems, Inc., which combines a 264 Table 1: A comparison of different retrieval techni ues System Success Rate Recall Precision (10 does) (10 docs) tf idf 28.6% 14.8% 2.9% SearchIt system 44.0% 28.5% 7.4% Recall II 60.7% 38.6% 7.3% w/o morph 50.0% not measured not measured w/o knowledge 42.9% not measured not measured simple morphological query expansion with a stateof-the-art commercial search engine. In the table, Recall II refers to the full conceptual indexing and search system with all of its knowledge sources and rules. T
Salton, 1989
Gerard Salton. 1989. Automatic Text Processing. Addison Wesley, Reading, MA.
Karen Sparck Jones
A look back and a look forward.
1998
SIGIR,
13--29
y-based score that is highly correlated with the likelihood that they contain relevant information. This ability, which we call &quot;Precision Content Retrieval&quot; is achieved by combining a system for Conceptual Indexing with an algorithm for Relaxation-Ranking Specific Passage Retrieval. In this paper, we show how linguistic knowledge is used to improve search effectiveness in this system. This is of particular interest, since many previous attempts to use linguistic knowledge to improve information retrieval have met with little or mixed success (Fagan, 1989; Lewis and Sparck Jones, 1996; Sparck Jones, 1998; Varile and Zampolli, 1997; Voorhees, 1993; Mandala et al., 1999) (but see the latter for some successes as well). * Lawrence Bookman is now at Torrent Systems, Inc. 2 Conceptual Indexing The conceptual indexing and retrieval system used for these experiments automatically extracts words and phrases from unrestricted text and organizes them into a semantic network that integrates syntactic, semantic, and morphological relationships. The resulting conceptual taxonomy (Woods, 1997) is used by a specific passage-retrieval algorithm to deal with many paraphrase relationships and to find specific 
Jones, 1998
Karen Sparck Jones. 1998. A look back and a look forward. SIGIR, pages 13-29.
Giovanni Varile
Antonio Zampolli
editors
1997
Survey of the State of the Art in Human Language Technology.
Cambridge Univ. Press.
Varile, Zampolli, editors, 1997
Giovanni Varile and Antonio Zampolli, editors. 1997. Survey of the State of the Art in Human Language Technology. Cambridge Univ. Press.
Ellen M Voorhees
Using wordnet to disambiguate word senses for text retrieval.
1993
In Proceedings of 16th ACM SIGIR Conference.
ACMSIGIR.
with the likelihood that they contain relevant information. This ability, which we call &quot;Precision Content Retrieval&quot; is achieved by combining a system for Conceptual Indexing with an algorithm for Relaxation-Ranking Specific Passage Retrieval. In this paper, we show how linguistic knowledge is used to improve search effectiveness in this system. This is of particular interest, since many previous attempts to use linguistic knowledge to improve information retrieval have met with little or mixed success (Fagan, 1989; Lewis and Sparck Jones, 1996; Sparck Jones, 1998; Varile and Zampolli, 1997; Voorhees, 1993; Mandala et al., 1999) (but see the latter for some successes as well). * Lawrence Bookman is now at Torrent Systems, Inc. 2 Conceptual Indexing The conceptual indexing and retrieval system used for these experiments automatically extracts words and phrases from unrestricted text and organizes them into a semantic network that integrates syntactic, semantic, and morphological relationships. The resulting conceptual taxonomy (Woods, 1997) is used by a specific passage-retrieval algorithm to deal with many paraphrase relationships and to find specific passages of text where the information soug
Voorhees, 1993
Ellen M. Voorhees. 1993. Using wordnet to disambiguate word senses for text retrieval. In Proceedings of 16th ACM SIGIR Conference. ACMSIGIR.
William A Woods
Understanding subsumpdon and taxonomy: A framework for progress. In
1991
Principles of Semantic Networks: Explorations in the Representation of Knowledge,
45--94
John Sowa, editor,
Morgan Kaufmann,
San Mateo, CA.
 262 for the analysis of phrases, as well as morphological and semantic information that is used to relate more specific concepts to more general concepts in the conceptual taxonomy. This information is integrated into the conceptual taxonomy by considering base forms of words to subsume their derived and inflected forms (&quot;root subsumption&quot;) and more general terms to subsume more specific terms. The system uses these relationships as the basis for inferring subsumption relationships between more general phrases and more specific phrases according to the intensional subsumption logic of Woods (Woods, 1991). The largest base lexicon used by this system currently contains semantic subsumption information for something in excess of 15,000 words. This information consists of basic &quot;kind of&quot; and &quot;instance of&quot; information such as the fact that book is a kind of document and washing is a kind of cleaning. The lexicon also records morphological roots and affixes for words that are derived or inflected forms of other words, and information about different word senses and their interrelationships. For example, the conceptual indexing system is able to categorize becomes black as a kind of color change be
Woods, 1991
William A. Woods. 1991. Understanding subsumpdon and taxonomy: A framework for progress. In John Sowa, editor, Principles of Semantic Networks: Explorations in the Representation of Knowledge, pages 45-94. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA.
William A Woods
Conceptual indexing: A better way to organize knowledge.
1997
Technical Report SMLI TR-97-61,
Sun Microsystems Laboratories,
Mountain View, CA,
rove information retrieval have met with little or mixed success (Fagan, 1989; Lewis and Sparck Jones, 1996; Sparck Jones, 1998; Varile and Zampolli, 1997; Voorhees, 1993; Mandala et al., 1999) (but see the latter for some successes as well). * Lawrence Bookman is now at Torrent Systems, Inc. 2 Conceptual Indexing The conceptual indexing and retrieval system used for these experiments automatically extracts words and phrases from unrestricted text and organizes them into a semantic network that integrates syntactic, semantic, and morphological relationships. The resulting conceptual taxonomy (Woods, 1997) is used by a specific passage-retrieval algorithm to deal with many paraphrase relationships and to find specific passages of text where the information sought is likely to occur. It uses a lexicon containing syntactic, semantic, and morphological information about words, word senses, and phrases to provide a base source of semantic and morphological relationships that are used to organize the taxonomy. In addition, it uses an extensive system of knowledge-based morphological rules and functions to analyze words that are not already in its lexicon, in order to construct new lexical entries fo
owledge sources used in these experiments included a core lexicon of approximately 18,000 words, a substantial set of morphological rules, and specialized morphological algorithms covering inflections, prefixes, suffixes, lexical compounding, and a variety of special forms, including numbers, ordinals, Roman numerals, dates, phone numbers, and acronyms. In addition, they made use of a lexical subsumption taxonomy of approximately 3000 lexical subsumption relations, and a small set of semantic entailment axioms (e.g., display entails see, but is not a kind of see). This system is described in (Woods, 1997). The database was a snapshot of the local man pages (frozen at the time of the experiment so that it wouldn't change during the experiment), consisting of approximately 1800 files of varying lengths and constituting a total of approximately 10 megabytes of text. Table 1 shows the results of comparing three versions of this technology with a textbook implementation of the standard tfidf algorithm (Salton, 1989) and with the SearchltTM search application developed at Sun Microsystems, Inc., which combines a 264 Table 1: A comparison of different retrieval techni ues System Success Rate Recall P
Woods, 1997
William A. Woods. 1997. Conceptual indexing: A better way to organize knowledge. Technical Report SMLI TR-97-61, Sun Microsystems Laboratories, Mountain View, CA, April. www.sun.com/research/techrep/1997/abstract61.html.
William A Woods
Aggressive morphology for robust lexical coverage. In
2000
(these proceedings).
ge-retrieval algorithm to deal with many paraphrase relationships and to find specific passages of text where the information sought is likely to occur. It uses a lexicon containing syntactic, semantic, and morphological information about words, word senses, and phrases to provide a base source of semantic and morphological relationships that are used to organize the taxonomy. In addition, it uses an extensive system of knowledge-based morphological rules and functions to analyze words that are not already in its lexicon, in order to construct new lexical entries for previously unknown words (Woods, 2000). In addition to rules for handling derived and inflected forms of known words, the system includes rules for lexical compounds and rules that are capable of making reasonable guesses for totally unknown words. A pilot version of this indexing and retrieval system, implemented in Lisp, uses a collection of approximately 1200 knowledge-based morphological rules to extend a core lexicon of approximately 39,000 words to give coverage that exceeds that of an English lexicon of more than 80,000 base forms (or 150,000 base plus inflected forms). Later versions of the conceptual indexing and retrieva
Woods, 2000
William A. Woods. 2000. Aggressive morphology for robust lexical coverage. In (these proceedings).
