<newSection> 1.
INTRODUCTION During the past two decades, much work in linguistics has focused on sentences as minimal units of communication, and the project of rigorously characterizing the structure of sentences in natural language has met with some success.
Not surprisingly, however, sentence grammars have contributed little to the analysis of discourse.
Human discourse consists not just of words in sequences, but of words in sequences directed by a speaker to an addressee, used to represent situations and to reveal intentions.
Only when the addressee has apprehended both these aspects of the message communicated can the message be interpreted.
The analysis of discourse that emerges from Austin (1962), grounded in a theory of action, takes this view as central, and the concept of the speech act follows naturally.
An utterance may have a conventional meaning, but the interpretation of the actual meaning of the utterance as it is used in discourse depends on evaluating the utterance in the context of the set of intentions which represent the illocutionary mode of its presentation.
Put another way (paraphrasing Searle (1975:3)).
the speaker's intention is to produce understanding, consisting of the knowledge of conditions on the speech act being performed.
If we are to take seriously Scarle's (1969:16) assertion that &quot;the unit of linguistic communication is not ...
the symbol, word, or sentence, ...
but rather the production or the issuance of the symbol, word or sentence in the performance of the speech act.&quot; then we should be able to find some formal method of characterizing speech acts in discourse.
Unfortunately, linguists have too often employed speech acts as taxonomic conveniences, as in Dore (1977), Labov and Fanshel (1977), and elsewhere, without attempting to give anything more than a descriptive definition.
Only in the artificial intelligence literature, notably in the work of Allen, Bruce, Cohen, and Perrault (e.g. Allen (1979), Bruce and Newman (1978), Cohen and Perrault (1979), Cohen (1978), Perrault, Allen, and Cohen (1978)), does one find an attempt to define speech acts in terms of more general processes, here specifically, operations on planning networks.