<newSection> I INTRODUCTION At the Navy Center for Applied Research in Artificial Intelligence, we have begun computer-analyzing and processing the compact text in Navy equipment failure messages, specifically equipment failure messages about electronics and data communications systems.
These messages are required to be sent within 24 hours of the equipment casualty.
Narrative remarks are restricted to a length of no more than 99 lines, and each line is restricted to a length of no more than 69 characters.
Because hundreds of these messages are sent daily to update ship readiness data bases, automatic procedures are being implemented to handle them efficiently.
Our task has been to process them for purposes of dissemination and summarization, and we have developed a prototype system for this purpose.
To capture the information in the narrative, we have chosen to use natural language understanding techniques developed at the Linguistic String Project [Sager 19811.
These messages, like medical reports [Marsh 19821 and technical manuals [Lehrberger 1982], exhibit properties of text compression, in part due to imposed time and length constraints.
Some methods of compression result in sentences that are usually called ill-formed in normal English texts [Eastman 1981].
Although unusual in normal, full English texts, these are characteristic of messages.
Recent work on these properties.
include discussions of omissions of function words such as the copula be, which results in sentence fragments and omissions of articles in compact text [Marsh 1982, 1983; Bachenko 1983].
However, compact text also utilizes mechanisms of compression that are present in normal English but are used with greater frequency in messages and technical reports.
Although the messages contain sentence fragments, they also contain many complete sentences.
These sentences are long and complicated in spite of the telegraphic style often used.
The internal structure of noun phrases in these constructions is often quite complex, and it is in these noun phrases that we find syntactic constructions characteristic of text compression.
Similar properties have been noted in other report sublanguages [Lehrberger, 1982; Levi, 1978].
When processing these messages it becomes important to recognize signs of text compression since the function words that so often direct a parsing procedure and reduce the choice of possible constructions are frequently absent.
Without these overt markers of phrase boundaries, straightforward parsing becomes difficult and structural ambiguity becomes a serious problem.
For example, sentences (1)-(2) are superficially identical, however in Navy messages, the first is a request for a part (an antenna) and the second a sentence fragment specifying an antenna performing a specific function.
(a transmit antenna).
The question arises of how to recognize and capture these distinctions.
We have chosen to take a sublanguage, or domain specific, approach to achieving correct parses by specifying the types of possible combinations among elements of a construction in both structural and semantic terms.
This paper discusses a method for recognizing instances of textual compression and identifies two types of textual compression that arise in standard and sublanguage texts: complex noun sequences and nominalizations.
These are both typically found in noun phrase constructions.
We propose a set of semantic relations for complex noun sequences, within a sublanguage analysis, that permits the proper bracketing of modifier and host for correct interpretation of noun phrases.