<newSection> I INTRODUCTION The Layered Domain Class system (LDC) is an experimental natural language processor being developed at Duke University.
In this paper we concentrate on the typ 3S of modifiers provided by LDC and the methods by which the system acquires information about the syntax and semantics of user-defined modifiers.
A more complete description is available in [4,5], and further details on matters not discussed in this paper can be found in [1,2,8,8,9].
The LDC system is made up of two primary components.
First, the knowledge acquisition component, whose job is to find out about the vocabulary and semantics of the language to be used for a new domain, then inquire about the composition of the underlying input file.
Second, the User-Phase Processor, which enables a user to obtain statistical reductions on his or her data by typed English inputs.
The top-level design of the User-Phase processor involves a linear sequence of modules for scanning the input and looking up each token in the dictionary; parsing the scanned input to determine its syntactic structure; translation of the parsed input into an appropriate formal query; and finally query processing.
This research has been supported in part by the National Science Foundation, Grants MCS-81-16607 and IST-83-01994; in part by the National Library of Medicine, Grant LM-07003; and in part by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, Grant 81-0221.
The User-Phrase portion of LDC resembles familiar natural language database query systems such as INTELLECT, JETS, LADDER, LUNAR, PHLIQA, PLANES, REL, RENDEZVOUS, TQA, and USL (see [10-231) while the overall LDC system is similar in its objectives to more recent systems such as ASK, CONSUL, IRUS, and TEAM (see [24-31]).
At the time of this writing, LDC has been completely customized for two fairly complex domains, from which examples are drawn in the remainder of the paper, and several simpler ones.
The complex domains are a final grades domain, giving course grades for students in an academic department, and a building organization domain, containing information on the floors, wings, corridors, occupants, and so forth for one or more buildings.
Among the simpler domains LDC has been customized for are files giving employee information and stock market quotations.