<newSection> 2 Framework for SCF Acquisition We employ for hypothesis generation the SCF acquisition system of Briscoe and Carroll (1997).
This system is capable of distinguishing 163 verbal scFs a superset of those found in the ANLT (Boguraev et al., 1987) and COMLEX Syntax dictionaries (Grishman et al., 1994) and returning relative frequencies for each SCF found for a verb.
It works by first tagging, lemmatizing and parsing corpus data using a robust statistical parser (Carroll and Briscoe, 1996) which employs a grammar written in a feature-based unification grammar formalism.
This yields complete though intermediate parses.
Local syntactic frames including the syntactic categories and head lemmas of constituents are then extracted from parses, from sentence subanalyses which begin/end at the boudaries of predicates.
The resulting patterns are assigned to scFs on the basis of the feature values of syntactic categories and head lemmas in each pattern.
Finally, sets of scFs are gathered for verbs and putative lexical entries are constructed.
The method for hypothesis selection exploits the knowledge that semantically similar verbs are frequently similar also in terms of subcategorization.
The motion verbs fly and move, for example, take similar SCF distributions, which differ essentially from the ones taken e.g. by communication verbs tell and say.
Although no perfect correspondence exists between the semantic and syntactic properties of verbs, useful generalizations can be made: Levin (1993) has demonstrated that verb senses can be divided into semantic classes distinctive in terms of subcategorization.
Korhonen (2000) shows that verb forms can also be divided into such classes, according to their predominant (i.e. the most frequent) sense.
For instance, the verb form specific SCF distributions for the highly polysemic verbs fly and move correlate quite well because the predominant senses of these verbs (according to the WordNet (Miller, 1990) frequency data2) are similar.
They both belong to the Levin &quot;Motion verbs&quot;.
Good correlation is observed because the distribution of verb senses tends to be zipfian: the predominant sense typically covers most of the total frequency mass (Preiss et al., 2002).
The method for hypothesis selection involves first (manually) identifying, for a single verb, the broad Levin class3 corresponding to the predominant sense of this verb in WordNet.
A SCF distribution is then acquired for the verb from corpus data, using the hypothesis generator described in the previous section.
This distribution is smoothed - using linear interpolation (Chen and Goodman, 1996).
- with the &quot;backoff&quot; estimates of the Levin class.
Back-off estimates are obtained by (i) choosing 4-5 representative Levin verbs from a class, (ii) building SCF distributions for these verbs by manually analysing c.
300 occurrences of each verb in the BNC corpus (Leech, 1992) and (iii) merging the resulting set of SCF distributions.
For example, the back-off estimates for the &quot;Motion verbs&quot; are constructed by merging the SCF distributions for fly, walk, march and travel.
A simple method is finally used for filtering, which sets an empirically defined threshold on the probability estimates from smoothing.
Essentially, this method involves using a priori knowledge about generalizations of verb semantics to guide subcategorization acquisition.
Back-off estimates are used to correct the acquired SCF distribution and deal with sparse data.
However, the parameters used in smoothing are obtained by optimising SCF acquisition performance on held-out training data so that most of the smoothed probability is determined by the maximum likelihood estimate (mLE) from the hypothesis generator.
Korhonen (2000) evaluated this method with 60 test verbs from 10 Levin classes.
It yielded 88% type precision (the percentage of SCF types that the method proposes which are correct) and 69% type recall (the percentage of SCF types in the gold standard that the method proposes).
The method was compared against a baseline method which sets threshold on MLES of SCFS from the hypothesis generator.
F measure4 was 77.1 for the novel method and 70.1 for the baseline.
This preliminary experiment shows that the proposed method provides an effective way of dealing with low frequency associations and a means of predicting unseen associations in corpus data.
In this paper, we describe how this semantically-driven method for hypothesis selection was refined further and integrated as part of large-scale SCF acquisition.