<newSection> Introduction Welcome to the NAACL-HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Neurolinguistics.
This is the first workshop to be held on this emerging topic, which integrates recent advances in computational linguistics and cognitive neuroscience with the latest methods from machine learning.
This new field promises to aid in the further development of cognitively plausible theories of language, to provide a third empirical basis as a benchmark for computational linguistics (besides corpora, and data elicited from informants), and to enrich the models of language used in neuroscience with the precision and breadth that computational linguistic methods provide.
More ambitious blue-sky applications being pursued include language-based brain-computer interfaces, parsing of sentential structure from recordings of neural activity during language processing, and the derivation of language resources from neuroimaging data.
We hope that this event will provide an interdisciplinary forum for the free exchange of ideas between the participants, whose expertise ranges across computational linguistics, cognitive psychology, brain decoding, psycholinguistics and other areas of cognitive science.
In preparation for the workshop we released two neural recording data-sets and corresponding language models (the CMU fMRI set and the Trento EEG set, both on a lexical semantic processing task) to allow researchers from different specialties to contribute.
The papers that will be presented at the workshop cover a range of neuroimaging techniques (EEG, fMRI, MEG), models of language phenomena (distributional models of lexical semantics, formal ontologies, word class distinctions, connectionist approaches), and of machine learning and data mining methods (Bayesian learning, source separation models, regression techniques, non-linear classifiers).
In addition to the submitted papers we will have two additional talks.
We are very happy to welcome Tom Mitchell to open the event.
Over recent years Prof. Mitchell has chosen neuroimaging data, and language, as the two phenomena that he will focus on in his machine learning research.
In addition we will give a mini-tutorial: a crash course for computational linguists in the neuroscience of language, and on basic principles of neuroimaging techniques.
Brian Murphy, Kai-min Chang, and Anna Korhonen.
iii Organizers: Brian Murphy, Centre for Mind/Brain Studies, University of Trento, Italy Kai-min Kevin Chang, Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA Anna Korhonen, Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge, UK