<newSection> 1 Introduction In the past, quite a few phenomena related to discourse structures have been studied, such as lexical cohesion (Halliday and Hasan, 1976), coherence relation (Hobbs, 1985; Wu and Lytinen, 1989), and rhetorical relation (Mann and Thompson, 1988).
On the other hand, there also exists abundant research on communicative intention such as speech act theory (Searle, 1968) and relevance maxim (Wilson and Sperber, 1986).
One logical question to ask is then: What is the relationship between discourse structures and communicative intention?
In the following, we shall take an objective approach to bridging the gap between these two SPIS of phenomena.
More specifically, certain discourse structures and communicative intentions are taken.
as literally as possible, from their &quot;native&quot; theories; Then, without any predefined framework, we observe the emergence of an integral discourse model encompassing these structures and intentions via necessary &quot;bridging&quot; knowledge and inferences.
Thus, on the one hand, our integrative views toward discourse structures and intentions are similar to (Grosz and Sidner, 1986) and ( Moore and Pollack, 1992) in the sense that we hold On the other hand, unlike previous work, we formulate knowledge sources which explair, bow the emergence of integrated discourse model is possible, rather than just identifying such integration.
In particular, the following knowledge sources are identified: KN-LC which associate concepts denoted by words (anchoring Lexical Cohesion) KN-SA which interpret utterances in terms of the speaker's mental models which consist of propositions embedded in attitude contexts (anchoring Speech Acts) KN-CR which specify a domain theory of physical world (anchoring Coherence Relations) KN-RR which specify a domain theory of mental dynamics (anchoring Rhetorical Relations) The above four knowledge sources in turns are governed by the ultimate principles of Relevance Maxim (KN-RM).
In short, by explicating the knowledge behind discourse structures and intentions.
we advocate that the stratification of discourse structures and intentions is motivated/supporte(l by modularized, but related, knowledge sources.
'This, however, will not he discussed here; interested readers are referred to (Wu, 1)93) for some d discussion.