<newSection> 1.
STRUCTURED OBJECTS A structured object is like a template (Sridharan 1978) or unit (Bobrow and Winograd 1977) or concept (Brachman 19781 in that it implicitly defines a set of instances.
It is characterized by a hierarchial structure.
This structure consists of other structured objects which are components (not sub-concepts!).
For example the structured object PATIENT-LEFT-EYE is a component of the structured object PATIENT.
Structured objects also have attributes, for example PATIENT-SEX is an attribute of PATIENT.
Attributes can have numeric or non-numeric values.
Each attribute has an associated &quot;measurement concept&quot; which defines the set of legal values, units etc.
A structured object is represented as a directed graph Where nodes represent components and attributes, and arcs represent relations between the concept* and its components.
The graph has a distinguished node, analogous to the root of a tree, whose label is the name of the concept.
All incoming arcs to the concept enter only at this distinguished or &quot;head&quot; node.
Figure 1 is a diagram of part of the structured object GLAUCOMA-PATIENT.
There are only a limited number of relations.
These are: relation between PATIENT and PATIENT-MEDICATION cannot be characterized as ATTR, PART or CUNT but are more complex, as shown by the following examples: The age of the patient (ATTR) (1) The medication of the patient (ASS) (2) The patient is receiving medication (ASS) (3) The patient is receiving age (7) (4) Although the relation between PATIENT and PATIENT-MEDICATION has some surface forms that make it look like an ATTR relation this is not really the case.
A &quot;true&quot; structured object would not have ASS links but they must be introduced to deal with GLAUCOMA-PATIENT.
The formal semantics of the ASS relation are very similar to those of the ATTR and PART relations.
FOCATTR (Focussing Attribute) If there are multiple identical sub-parts then typically (but not always) the values of a particular attribute are used to distinguish between them.
SUBC One concept is a sub-concept of another.
The PART, CON! and ASS links are qualified by N124BER and MODALITY as in [Brachman 1978].
MODALITY can have two values NECESSARY and OPTIONAL.
Modality is used to represent the fact that eyes are necessary parts of patients but scotomas (blind-spots) may or may not be present in the visual field.
NUMBER can be either a number (e.g. 2 EYES) or a predicate (e.g. >w0 scotomas).
The target of a PART CONT or ASS relation can also be a list as in