<newSection> I.
Introduction Among the components included in Natural Language Understanding (NLU) systems is a grammar which specifies much of the linguistic structure of the utterances that can be expected.
However, it is certain that inputs that are ill-formed with respect to the grammar will be received, both because people regularly form ungrammatical utterances and because there are a variety of forms that cannot be readily included in current grammatical models and are hence &quot;extra-grammatical&quot;.
These might be rejected, but as Milks stresses, &quot;...understanding requires, at the very least, ...
some attempt to interpret, rather than merely reject, what seem to be ill-formed utterances.&quot; EWIL76] This paper investigates several language phenomena commonly considered ungrammatical or extra-grammatical and proposes techniques directed at integrating them as much as possible into the conventional grammatical processing performed by NLU systems through Augmented Transition Network (ATN) grammars.
For each NLU system, a &quot;normative&quot; grammar is assumed which specifies the structure of well-formed inputs.
Rules that are both manually added to the original grammar or automatically constructed during parsing analyze the ill-formed input.
The ill-formedness is shown at the completion of a parse by deviance from fully grammatical structures.
We have been able to do this processing while preserving the structural characteristics of the original grammar and its inherent efficiency.
Some of the phenomena discussed have been considered previously in particular NLU systems, see for example the ellipsis handling in LIFER [HEN77].
Some techniques similar to ours have been used for parsing, see for example the conjunction mechanism in LUNAR (140073).
On the linguistic side, Chomsky (CH064] and Katz [KAT64], among others have considered the treatment of ungrammaticality in Transformational Grammar theories.
The study closest to ours is that of Weischedel and Black [WEI79].
The present study is distinguished by the range of phenomena considered, its structural and efficiency goals, and the inclusion of the techniques proposed within one implementation.
This paper looks at these problems, proposes mechanisms aimed at solving the problems, and describes how these mechanisms are used.
At the end, some extensions are suggested.
Unless otherwise noted, all ideas have been tested through implementation.
A more detailed and extended discussion of all points may be found in Kwasny [KWA79].