<newSection> AFFIX STRIPPER LETTER TO SOUND LEXICAL STRESS ALLOPHONICS ' output: /huwev3/ Several research systems are of this general design, including Allen's MITALK system, the TTS-X prototype at Telesensory Systems, and Liberman's proper name phonemicizer.
The most popular text-to-phoneme design is the NRL approach, which has only two components, of which only the first is presented in detail and evaluated by Elovitz.
The original NRL system is: input: &quot;word&quot; LETTER TO SOUND including some whole morphemes The very great advantage of the NRL approach is the unified treatment of letter sequences, affixes, and whole words.
There is exactly one pass through a word, left to right, in which the maximum string starting with the leftmost unphonemicized character is matched.
These strings are sometimes whole words, sometimes affixes, and sometimes consonant or vowel sequences or word fragments like &quot;BUIL&quot;.
The main constraint of the system is its greatest attraction: the unity and simplicity of the code that scans the word and accesses a single table of letter strings.
In contrast to this, the MITALK system, for instance, has one module and associated table structure for lexical decomposition of whole words, another module for stripping common affixes, and a third module for translating consonant and vowel sequences that remain in the pseudo-root of the word.
STUDY ONE Study One reports a comparison of two routines for translating orthographic letters into segmental phonemes: Hunnicutt@TSI and NRLODEC.
Hunnicutt@TSI is the affix stripper and letter to sound rules as discribed in AJCL Microfiche 57, and implemented in MACRO-11 in Telesensory Systems' TTS-X prototype text-to-speech system.
Hunnicutt's system was modified only slightly in translation, and about 20 rules were added.
The system starts from the right end of the word and identifies as many suffixes as it can from a table of about 140 suffixes, proceeding toward the beginning of the word until either the remainder (pseudo-root) of the word has no vowel or fewer than three letters, or no more suffixes can be matched.
Next, a similar proceedure works from the beginning of the word, matching as many prefixes as it can from • a table of about 40 prefixes.
Finally, the pseudo-root of the word is scanned left to right twice, once translating the consonants, and next translating the vowels.
NRL@DEC is a system implemented by Martin Minnow at Digital Equiptment Corp.
The whole system is somewhat more elaborate that the original NAL system, but the letter to sound module and its mode of operation are basically as described by Elovitz et alia, with 20 or 30 rules added.
The NAL rules include about 60 very common whole words, as well as about 25 rules that handle various environments for three prefixes and fifteen suffixes.
A set of 865 words was processed both by the Hunnicutt@TSI affix stripper and letter to sound rules, and by the NRL@DEC letter to sound rules including the affix rules and the word fragments.
The 865 words comprised approximately every fiftieth word of the Brown Corpus (Kucera & Francis, 1967) in frequency order, starting from about the 400th most frequent word: &quot;position.&quot; The lexicon of the TSI system was disabled, and none of the whole words in the NRL rules was in the set of 865.
Since the output from both subsystems was tapped before stress assignment, vowel reduction, and any allophonics were performed, the criterion of correctness was &quot;does this phonemicization represent any acceptable pronunciation of the spelled word, assuming one can assign stress correctly and then reduce vowels appropriately.&quot; Thus, a phonemicization consistent with any possible word class for that spelling, or any 'regular' regional pronunciation was to be accepted.
Three judges (two phoneticians and a phonologist) were given printed copies of the two resulting phonemic transcriptions; both were in fairly transparent broad phonemic form.
The judges chose among three possible responses to each word: 1 = correct; .5 = close or questionable; and 0 = wrong.
Cross judge consistency can be seen from the bimodal distribution of summed scores in Figure 1.
Another, more diagnostic way to view the results is to present the number of words that fall into each cell of a 2X2 grid formed by the Hunnicutt@TSI rating vs. the NRL@DEC rating, as shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2 omits the 26 words that had a summed score of 1.5 for either of the two letter to sound systems.
If the rule sets were equivalent, the grid would have zeroes in cells b and c.
If one rule set were a super-set of the other, you would get a zero in cell b or cell c, but not both.
Most of the 553 words in cell d are regular, or else are common exceptions (like &quot;built&quot;).
Most of the 127 words in cell a are obviously exceptional (e.g. &quot;minute, honor, one, two&quot;).
Examination of the 159 words distributed between cells b and c yields the payoff.
Of the 69 words that Hunnicutt@TSI got right and NRL@DEC missed, nearly half are correct by virtue of the extensive affix stripping in Hunnicutt's algorithm.
Among these 69 words in cell c are &quot;mobile, naval, wallace, likened, coworkers, & reenacted.&quot; Of the 90 words that NRL@DEC got right and Hunnicutt@TSI got wrong, only about 15 are definitely due to NRL's word fragment rules.
Six of the 90 words are in cell d just because MRL does not strip suffixes the way that Hunnicutt's rules do.
These six words are &quot;november, visited, preferably, presidency, september, & oven.&quot; In general, both algorithms get about 25% wrong on this lexically flat sample of 865 word types.
About 15% of the words are incorectly phonemicized by both subsystems.
This might suggest that 15% wrong may be a state of the art performance level for segmental phonemicization of word types by sets of 400 rules.
STUDY TWO Study Two compared the performance of two algorithms for assignment of lexical stress to words.
Both of the algorithms were coded in MACRO-11 and ran in different versions of TSI's TTS-X prototype text-to-speech system.
The first algorithm is Hunnicutt's lexical stresser, which is described in detail in AJCL Microfiche 57.
Hunnicutt's algorithm is an adaptation of Halle's cyclic stress rules for English.
The adaptations include adjustments for the less specified input to the rules (e.g. the part of speech of the root is unknown), and the number of stress levels specified in the output is reduced, presumably because the Klatt synthesizer it was designed to drive only used two stress levels.
Hunnicutt also added stress rules that depended on the occurance of certain classes of suffixes.
Hunnicutt's rules require several pointers and a suffix table, they sometimes pass through a word several times in the manner of Chomsky & Halle's (1968) rules, and they occupy about 3K bytes of executable code in their TSI version.
The second algorithm is a simplified version of a stress rule proposed in Hill & Nessly (1973).
We will refer to this rule as Nessly's default, since it is the default case of Nessly's full stress algorithm.
Nessly's default stress is quite similar to Latin stress and to the &quot;first approximation&quot; stress rule discussed twoard the beginning of Chomsky & Halle's chapter three (1968, pp.69-77).
The main differences between Nessly's default rule and Chomsky & Halle's &quot;first approximation&quot; are: (1) No word class information is used in Nessly's default, so verbs are stressed as nouns. and (2) What constitutes a &quot;strong cluster&quot; (which contains a tense vowel or a closed syllable end) is different.
Nessly's default is indifferent to vowel length or tensity.
Nessly's default rule can be outlined as follows: if(number of syllables = 1) stress it. if(number of syllables = 2) stress left syllable.
else skip the last syllable.
if(next-to-last is closed) stress it. else stress third from last.
(place alternating 2nd stresses on syllables to the left.)
The MACRO-11 version of this rule requires about 150 bytes of executable code, and accepts one pointer to the last vowel in the word.
It passes through the word once, right to left, and it does very well assigning correct stresses (in caps) to &quot;LUminant&quot; vs. &quot;maLIGnant,&quot; for example.
For testing the stress algorithms, a sample of 430 words was selected.
These 430 words were all the items of five or more characters that had frequencies of 40 ppm through 34 ppm (inclusive) in the Brown corpus.
The segmental phonemicization was done by Hunnicutt's rules in TSI's TTS-X prototype.
The automatically produced segmental phonemicizations that the stress algorithms operated on were rejected only if they did not have the correct number of syllables.
Thirteen of the 430 words were phonemicized with the wrong number of syllables.
Another 54, or 13%, of the 430 were one syllable words, which were allways assigned correct stress.
Stress assignments were judged by the first author.
The results on the remaining 417 words of the sample were: Hunnicutt/Halle 308 109 Nesoly default 303 114 So, on these words, the two algorithms perform at about the same level of accuracy, which is about 25% wrong on a lexical sample.