<newSection> I INTRODUCTION In this paper we present a modal temporal logic that has been developed for reasoning about change in data bases.
The basic motivation is as follows.
A data base contains information about the world: as the world changes, so does the data base -- probably maintaining some description of what the world was like before the change took place.
Moreover, if the world is constrained in the ways it can change, so is the date base.
We are motivated by the benefits to be gained by being able to represent those constraints and use them to reason about the possible states of a data base.
It is generally accepted that a natural language query system often needs to provide more than just the literal answer to a question.
For example, [Kaplan 821 presents methods for correcting a questioner's misconceptions (as reflected in a query) about the contents of a data base, as well as providing additional information in support of the literal answer to a query.
By enriching the data base model, Kaplan's work on correcting misconceptions was extended in [Mays 801 to distinguish between misconceptions about data base structure and data base contents.
In either case, however, the model was a static one.
By incorporating a model of the data base in which a dynamic view is allowed, answers to questions can include an offer to monitor for some condition which might possibly occur in the future.
The following is an example: U: &quot;Is the Kitty Hawk in Norfolk?&quot; S: &quot;No, shall I let you know when she is?&quot; 1 This work is partially supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation, NSF-MCS 81-07290.
But just having a dynamic view is not adequate, it is necessary ITat the dynamic view correspond to the possible evolution of the world that is modelled.
Otherwise, behaviors such as the following might arise: U: &quot;Is New York less than 50 miles from Philadelphia?&quot; S: &quot;No, shall I let you know when it is?&quot; An offer of a monitor is said to be competent only if the condition to be monitored can possibly occur.
Thus, in the latter example the offer is not competent, while in the former it is.
This paper is concerned with developing a logic for reasoning about change in data bases, and assessing the impact of that capability on the behavior of question answering systems.
The general area of extended interaction in data base systems is discussed in [WJMM 831.
As just pointed out, the ability to represent and reason about change in data bases affects the range and quality of responses that may be produced by a query system.
Reasoning about prior possiblity admits a class of queries dealing with the future possibility of some event or state of affairs at some time in the past.
These queries have the general form: &quot;Could it have been the case that p?&quot; This class of queries will be termed counterhistoricals in an attempt to draw some parallel with counterfactuals.
The future correlate of counterhistoricals, which one might call futurities, are of the form: &quot;Can it be the case that p?&quot; i.e. in the sense of: &quot;Might it ever be the case that p?&quot; The most interesting aspect of this form of question is that it admits the ability for a query system to offer a monitor as a response to a question for relevant information the system may become aware of at some future time.
A query system can only competently offer such monitors when it has this ability, since otherwise it cannot determine if the monitor may ever be satisfied.