ABSTRACT A correct structural analysis of a discourse is a prerequisite for understanding it.
This paper sketches the outline of a discourse grammar which acknowledges several different levels of structure.
This grammar, the &quot;Dynamic Discourse Model&quot;, uses an Augmented Transition Network parsing mechanism to build a representation of the semantics of a discourse in a stepwise fashion, from left to right, on the basis of the semantic representations of the individual clauses which constitute the discourse.
The intermediate states of the parser model the intermediate states of the social situation which generates the discourse.
The paper attempts to demonstrate that a discourse may indeed be viewed as constructed by means of sequencing and recursive nesting of discourse constituents.
It gives rather detailed examples of discourse structures at various levels, and shows how these structures are described in the framework proposed here.
I DISCOURSE STRUCTURES AT DIFFERENT LEVELS If a discourse understanding system is to be able to assemble the meaning of a complex discourse fragment (such as a story or an elaborate description) out of the meanings of the utterances constituting the fragment, it needs a correct structural analysis of it.
Such an analysis is also necessary to assign a correct semantic interpretation to clauses as they occur in the discourse; this is seen most easily in cases where this interpretation depends on phenomena such as the discourse scope of temporal and locative adverbials, the movement of the reference time in a narrative, or the interpretation of discourse anaphora.
The Dynamic Discourse Model, outlined in this paper, is a discourse grammar under development which analyses the structure of a discourse in order to be able to deal adequately with its semantic aspects.
It should be emphasized at the outset that this system is a formal model of discourse syntax and semantics, but not a computer implementation of such a model.
For a system to be able to understand a discourse, it must be able to analyse it at several different levels.
participants as belonging to a particular predefined genre -- be it a doctor-patient interaction, a religious ceremony, or a casual chat.
Depending on the genre, certain participants may have specific roles in the verbal exchange, and there may be a predefinedagenda specifying consecutive parts of the interaction.
An interaction which is socially &quot;interpreted&quot; in such a fashion is called a Speech Event (Hymes,1967,1972).
They are two or three part conversational routines involving speaker change.
The clearest examples are question-answer pairs and exchanges of greetings.
7. The smallest units which we shall deal with at the discourse level are clauses and operators.
Operators include &quot;connectors&quot; like &quot;and&quot;, &quot;or&quot;, &quot;because&quot;, as well as &quot;discourse markers&quot; like &quot;well&quot;, &quot;so&quot;, &quot;incidentally&quot;.
The levels of discourse structure just discussed are hierarchically ordered.
For instance, any DU must be part of a Speech Event, while it must be built up out of dcu's.
The levels may thus be viewed as an expansion of the familiar linguistic hierarchy of phoneme, morpheme, word and clause.
This does not mean, however, that every discourse is to be analysed in terms of a five level tree structure, with levels corresponding to dcu, DU, Topic, Speech Event and Interaction.
To be able to describe discourse as it actually occurs, discourse constituents of various types must be allowed to be embedded in constituents of the same and other types.
We shall see various examples of this in later sections.
It is worth emphasizing here already that &quot;high level constituents&quot; may be embedded in &quot;low level constituents&quot;.
For instance, a dcu may be interrupted by a clause which initiates another Interaction.
Thus, a structural description of the unfolding discourse would include an Interaction as embedded in the dcu.
In this way, we can describe &quot;intrusions&quot;, &quot;asides to third parties&quot;, and other interruptions of one Interaction by another.
In the description of discourse semantics, the level of the dcu's (including the adjacency structures) plays the most central role: at this level the system defines how the semantic representation of a complex discourse constituent is constructed out of the semantic representations of its parts.
The other levels of structure are also of some relevance, however: - The Discourse Unit establishes higher level semantic coherence.
For instance, the semantics of different episodes of one story are integrated at this level.
- The Topic provides a frame which determines the interpretation of many lexical items and descriptions.
- The Speech Event provides a script which describes the conventional development of the discourse, and justifies assumptions about the purposesofdis-course participants.
- The Interaction specifies referents for indexicals like &quot;I&quot;, &quot;you&quot;, &quot;here&quot;, &quot;now&quot;.
II THE DYNAMIC DISCOURSE MODEL Dealina with linguistic structures above the clause level is an enterprise which differs in an essential way from the more common variant of linguistic activity which tries to describe the internal structure of the verbal symbols people exchange.
Discourse linguistics does not study static verbal objects, but must be involved with the social process which produces the discourse -- with the ways in which the discourse participants manipulate the obligations and possibilities of the discourse situation, and with the ways in which their talk is constrained and framed by the structure of this discourse situation which they themselves created.
The structure one may assign to the text of a discourse is but a reflection of the structure of the process which produced it.
Because of this, the Dynamic Discourse Model that we are developing is only indirectly involved in trying to account for the a posteriori structure of a finished discourse; instead, it tries to trace the relevant states of the social space in terms of which the discourse is constructed.
This capability is obviously of crucial importance if the model is to be applied in the construction of computer systems which can enter into actual dialogs.
The Dynamic Discourse Model, therefore, must construct the semantic interpretation of a discourse on a clause by clause basis, from left to right, yielding intermediate semantic representations of unfinished constituents, as well as setting the semantic parameters whose values influence the interpretation of subsequent constituents.
A syntactic/semantic system of this sort may very well be fromulated as an Augmented Transition Network grammar (Woods, 1970), a non-deterministic parsing system specified by a set of transition networks which may call each other recursively.
Every Speech Event type, DU type and dcu type is associated with a transition network specifying its internal structure.
As a transition network processes the consecutive constituents of a discourse segment, it builds up, step by step, a representation of the meaning of the segment.
This representation is stored in a register associated with the network.
At any stage of the Process, this register contains a representation of the meaning of the discourse segment so far.
An ATN parser of this sort models important aspects of the discourse process.
After each clause, the system is in a well-defined state, characterized by the stack of active transition networks and, for each of them, the values in its registers and the place where it was interrupted.
When we say that discourse participants know &quot;where they are&quot; in a complicated discourse, we mean that they know which discourse constituent is being initiated or continued, as well as which discourse constituents have been interrupted where and in what order -- in other words, they are aware of the embedding structure and other information captured by the ATN configuration.
The meaning of most clause utterances cannot be determined on the basis of the clause alone, but involves register values of the embedding dcu -- as when a question sets up a frame in terms of which its answer is interpreted (cf. Scha, 1983) or when, to determine the temporal reference of a clause in a narrative, one needs a &quot;reference time&quot; which is established by the foregoing part of the narrative (section III B 2).
From such examples, we see that the discourse constituent unit serves as a framework for the semantic interpretation of the clauses which constitute the text.
By the same token, we see that the semantics of an utterance is not exhaustively described by indicating its illocutionary force and its propositional content.
An utterance may also cause an update in one or more semantic registers of the dcu, and thereby influence the semantic interpretation of the following utterances.
This phenomenon also gives us a useful perspective on the notion of interruption which was mentioned before.
For instance, we can now see the difference between the case of a story being interrupted by a discussion, and the superficially similar case of a story followed by a discussion which is, in its turn, followed by another story.
In the first case, the same dcu is resumed and all its register values are still available; in the second case, the first story has been finished before the discussion and the re-entry into a storyworld is via a different story.
The first story has been closed off and its register values are no longer avilable for re-activation; the teller of the second story must re-initialize the variables of time, place and character, even if the events of the second story concern exactly the same characters and situations as the first.
Thus, the notions of interruption and resumption have not only a social reality which is experienced by the interactants involved.
They also have semantic consequences for the building and interpretation of texts.
Interruption and resumption are often explicitly signalled by the occurrence of &quot;discourse markers&quot;.
Interruption is signalled by a PUSH-marker such as &quot;incidentally&quot;, &quot;by the way&quot;, &quot;you know&quot; or &quot;like&quot;.
Resumption is signalled by a POP-markers such as &quot;O.K.&quot;, &quot;well&quot;, &quot;so&quot; or &quot;anyway&quot;.
(For longer lists of discourse marking devices, and somewhat more discussion of their functioning, see Reichman (1981) and Polanyi and Scha(1983b).)
In terms of our ATN description of discourse structure, the PUSH- and POP-markers do almost exactly what their names suggest.
A PUSH-marker signals the creation of a new embedded discourse constituent, while a POP-marker signals a return to an embedding constituent (though not necessarily the immediately embedding one), closing off the current constituent and all the intermediate ones.
The fact that one POP-marker may thus create a whole cascade of discourse-POPs was one of Reichman's (1981) arguments for rejecting the ATN model of discourse structure.
We have indicated before, however, that accommodating this phenomenon is at worst a matter of minor technical extensions of the ATNfor-malism (Polanyi and Scha, 1983b); in the present paper, we shall from now on ignore it.
III DISCOURSE CONSTITUENT UNITS A.
Introduction.
This section reviews some important ways in which clauses (being our elementary discourse constituent units) can be combined to form complex discourse constituent units (which, in most cases, may be further combined to form larger dcu' s, by recursive application of the same mechanisms).
For the moment, we are thus focussing on the basic discourse syntactic patterns which make it possible to construct complex discourses, and on the semantic interpretation of these patterns.
Sections IV and V will then discuss the higher level structures, where the interactional perspective on discourse comes more to the fore.
To be able to focus on discourse level phenomena, we will assume that the material to be dealt with by the discourse grammar is a sequence consisting of clauses and operators (connectors and discourse markers).
It is assumed that every clause carries the value it has for features such asspeak-er, clause topic, propositional content (represented by a formula of a suitable logic), preposed constituents (with thematic role and semantics), tense, mood, modality.
(The syntactic features we must include here have semantic consequences which can not always be dealt with within the meaning of the clause, since they may involve discourse issues.)
The semantics of a dcu is built up in parallel with its syntactic analysis, bythelsame recursive mechanism.
When clauses or dcu's are combined to form a larger dcu, their meanings are combined to form the meaning of this dcu.
Along with registers for storing syntactic features and semantic parameters, each dcu has a register which is used to build up the logical representation of its meaning.
Since the syntactic and semantic rules operate in parallel, the syntactic rules have the possibility of referring to the semantics of the constituents they work on.
This possibility is in fact used in certain cases.
We shall see an example in section III C 1.
Complex discourse constituent units can be divided into four structurally different types: - sequences, which construct a dcu out of arbitrarily many constituents (e.g.: lists, narratives).
- expansions, consisting of a clause and a subordinated unit which &quot;expands&quot; on it.
- structures formed by a binary operator, such as &quot;A because B&quot;, &quot;If A then B&quot;.
- adjacency structures, involving speaker change, such as question/answer pairs and exchanges of greetings.
In the next subsections, III B and III C, we shall discuss sequences and expansions in more detail.
One general point we should like to make here already: sequences as well as expansions correspond to extensional semantic operations.
The propositions expressing the meanings of their constituents are evaluated with respect to the same possible world -- the successive constituents simply add up to one description.
(We may note that some of the binary structures which we shall not consider further now, certainly correspond to intensional operations. &quot;If A then B&quot; is a clear example.)
Since we will not discuss adjacency structures in any detail in this paper, the problem of accommodating speaker change and different illocutionary forces in the discourse semantics will be left for another occasion.
We shall discuss three kinds of sequential structures: lists, narratives, and topic chaining.
Perhaps the paradigmatic sequential structure is the list: a series of clauses C1&quot; Ck which have a semantic structure of the form F(a1) = v,, F(ak) = vk, i.e., the clauses express propositions which convey the values which one function has for a series of alternative arguments.
For instance, when asked to describe the interior of a room, someone may give an answer structured like this: &quot;When I come into the door, then I see, to the left of me on the wall, a large window (...).
Eh, the wall across from me, there is a eh basket chair (...).
On the right wall is a mm chair (...).
In the middle of the room there is, from left to right, an oblong table, next to that a round table, and next to that a tall cabinet.
Now I think I got everything.&quot; (Transcript by Ehrich and Koster (1983), translated from Dutch; the constituents we left out, indicated by parenthesized dots, are subordinated constituents appended to the NP they follow.)
The list here occurs embedded under the phrase &quot;I see&quot;, and is closed off by the phrase &quot;Now I think I got everything&quot;.
Often, the successive arguments in a list arementioned ma non-random order -- in the above case, for instance, we first get the locations successively encountered in a &quot;glance tour&quot; from left to right along the walls; then the rest.
The ATN description of lists is very simple*: clause: next clause: clause: first ' :ext 0 )0 list Both the first and the next arc parse clauses which must have the semantic structure F(a) = v.
(Whether a clause can be analysed in this fashion, depends on surface properties such as stress pattern and preposing of constituents.)
Various registers are set by the first clause and checked when next clauses are parsed, in order to enforce agreement in features such as tense, mood, modality.
The semantics of a new clause being parsed is simply conjoined with the semantics of the list so far.
2. Narratives.
Narratives may be seen as a special case of lists -- successive event clauses specify what happens at successive timepoints in the world described by the narrative.
Narratives are subdivided into different genres, marked by different tense and/or person orientation of their main line clauses: specific past time narratives (marked by clauses in the simple past, though clauses in the &quot;historical present&quot; may also occur), generic past time narratives ( marked by the use of &quot;would&quot; and &quot;used to&quot;), procedural narratives (present tense), simultaneous reporting (present tense), plans (use of &quot;will&quot; and &quot;shall&quot;; present tense also occurs).
We shall from now on focus on specific past narratives.
The properties of other narratives turn out to be largely analogous.
(Cf. Longacre (1979) who suggests treating the internal structure of a discourse constituent and its &quot;genre specification&quot; as two independent dimensions.) clause: event clause: circumstance flashback specific past narrative All clause-processing arcs in this network for &quot;specific past narratives&quot; require that the tense of the clause be present or simple past.
The event arc and the eventi arc process clauses with a non-durative aspect.
The circumstance arc processes clauses with a durative aspect.
(The aspectual category of a clause is determined by the semantic categories of its constituents. Cf. Verkuyl, 1972.)
The event1 arc is distinguished because it initializes the register settings.
* Notation: All diagrams in this paper have one initial state (the leftmost one) and one final state (the rightmost one).
The name of the diagram indicates the category of the constituent it parses.
Arcs have labels of the form &quot;A:B&quot; (or sometimes just &quot;A&quot;), where A indicates the category of the constituent which must be parsed to traverse the arc, and B is a label identifying additional conditions and/or actions.
The specific past narrative network has a time register containing a formula representing the current reference time in the progression of the narrative.
When the time register has a value t, an incoming circumstance clause is evaluated at t, and it does not change the value of the time register.
An event clause, however, is evaluated with respect to a later but adjacent interval t', and resets the time register to an interval t&quot;, later than but adjacent to t'.
(Cf. Polanyi and Scha, 1981) To show that this gives us the desired semantic consequences, we consider an abbreviated version of a detective story fragment, quoted by Hinrichs (1981): (El) He went to the window The E clauses are events, the C clauses are circumstances.
The events are evaluated at disjoint, suc-sessively later intervals.
The circumstances are evaluated at the same interval, between 82 and E3.
To appreciate that the simultaneity of subsequent circumstance clauses in fact is a consequence of aspectual class rather than a matter of &quot;world knowledge&quot;, one may compare the sequence &quot;Be went to the window and pulled aside the soft drapes&quot; to the corresponding sequence of circumstance clauses: &quot;He was going to the window and was pulling aside the soft drapes&quot;.
World knowledge does come in, however, when one has to decide how much the validity of a circumstance clause extends beyond the interval in the narrative sequence where it is explicitly asserted.
Specific past narratives may also contain other constituents than clauses.
An important case in point is the &quot;flashback&quot; -- an embedded narrative which relates events taking place in a period before the reference time of the main narrative.
A flashback is introduced by a clause in the pluperfect; the clauses which continue it may be in the pluperfect or the simple past.
clause: f-event clause: f-mit pop 0 clause: )f-circumstance flashback The first clause in a flashback (f-mit) is an event clause; it initializes register settings.
The reference time within a flashback moves according to the same meachanism sketched above for the main narrative line.
After the completion of a flashback, the main narrative line continues where it left off it proceeds from the reference time of the main narrative.
A simple example: Peter and Mary left the party in a hurry.
Mary had ran into John and she had insulted him.
So they got into the car and drove down Avenue C.