<newSection> 1.
Introduction The role of prosody in discourse has been generally acknowledged but little understood.
Linguistic pragmaticists have noted that types of information status (such as given/new, topic/comment, focus/presupposition) can be intonationally 'marked' [1,2,3,4], that reference resolution may depend critically on intonation [5,6], that intonation can be used to disambiguate among potentially ambiguous utterances [7,8], and that indirect speech acts may be signalled by intonational means [9,10,11].
Conversational analysis of naturally occurring data has found that speakers may signal topic shift, digression, and interruption, as well as turn-taking, intonationally [12,13,14].
And the fact that intonational contours contribute in some way to utterance interpretation is itself unexception-able [8].
To date, however, identification of the prosodic phenomena involved -- and the proper mapping between these phenomena and their semantico-pragmatic effects -- has been largely intuitive, and the intonational phenomena involved have not been precisely described.
Here, we describe how certain of the resources of the intonational system are employed in discourse.
In particular, we discuss how speakers' choice of pitch range, accent, and tune contribute to the intentional and attentional structuring of discourse -- the way speakers communicate the relationships among their discourse goals and the relative salience of entities, attributes, and relationships mentioned in the discourse.1 Our findings emerge from an intensive study of a simple example of speech synthesis: the script of a computer-aided instruction system, TNT (Tutor 'n' Trainer) [16], which employs synthetic speech to tutor computer novices in the text editor vi.
Using the Text to Speech system (TTS) [17], we have been able, by systematic variation of pitch 1 Grosz and Sidner 1151 propose a tripartite view of discourse structure: a linguistic structure, which is the text/speech itself; an attentlonal structure, including information about the relative salience of objects, properties, relations, and intentions at a given point in the discourse; and an Intentional structure, which relates discourse segment purposes (those purposes whose recognition is essential to a segment achieving its intended effect) to one another.
range and by a principled choice of accent and tune, to highlight the structure of the tutorial text and thus to enhance its coherence.
While most studies of how intonation is used in discourse, have been based solely on examination of intonational contours found in a natural corpus, we have found that intonation synthesis provides a unique opportunity to manipulate the dimensions of variation orthogonally.
Thus we can pinpoint factors crucial for a given effect and evaluate various patterns for a given utterance and context.