<newSection> ABSTRACT Narrative passages told from a character's perspective convey the character's thoughts and perceptions.
We present a discourse process that recognizes characters' thoughts and perceptions in third-person narrative.
An effect of perspective on reference in narrative is addressed: references in passages told from the perspective of a character reflect the character's beliefs.
An algorithm that uses the results of our discourse process to understand references with respect to an appropriate set of beliefs is presented.
perspective of one or more of its characters; it can also contain passages that are not told from the perspective of any character.
We present a computational theory of how readers recognize the current perspective in third-person narrative, and of the effects of perspective on the way readers understand references in third-person narrative.
We consider published novels and short stories, rather than artificially constructed narratives.
2. BANFIELD'S THEORY.
Our notion of perspective in narrative is based on Ann &infield's (1982) categorization of the sentences of narration into subjective and objective sentences.
Subjective sentences include those that portray a character's thoughts (represented thought) or present a scene as a character perceives it (represented perception).
Objective sentences present the story directly, rather than through the thoughts or perceptions of a character.
The language used to convey thoughts and perceptions is replete with linguistic elements that make no sense unless they are interpreted with respect to the thinking or perceiving character's consciousness.
Banfield calls them subjective elements; they appear only in subjective sentences and cannot appear within objective sentences.
&Infield identifies perspective in narrative with subjectivity, which is expressible via subjective elements.
We call the thinking or perceiving character of a subjective sentence the subjective character.
3. A DISCOURSE-LEVEL APPROACH.
Our task of recognizing the current perspective is, therefore, to recognize subjective sentences and the subjective characters to whom they are attributed.
However, we cannot take a sentence-by-sentence approach, deciding independently for each sentence whether it is objective or subjective, and, if subjective, who the subjective character is.
First, although thoughts and perceptions are often reported (as by sentences beginning with &quot;He thought that ..
.
&quot; or &quot;She saw . &quot;), and thoughts are often accompanied by narrative parentheticals (such as &quot;he thought&quot; or &quot;he realized&quot;), many thoughts and perceptions are not marked in these ways.
Second, subjective sentences do not always explicitly indicate who the subjective character is.
For example: (1) 11He wanted to talk to Dermys.
11How were they going to be able to get home from this strange desert land into which they had been cast and which was heaven knew where in all the countless solar systems in all the countless galaxies?
[L'Engle, Many Waters, p.91] (2) 1But what [Muhammad] had seen in those few moments made him catch his breath in amazement 220n the floor of the cave, which curved back in a natural fault in the rock, there were several large cylindrical objects standing in a row.
[John Allegro, The Dead Sea Scrolls] Sentence (1.2) is a represented thought, and (2.2) is a represented perception, presenting what the character sees as he sees it, yet neither is explicitly marked as such.
Also, neither indicates who the subjective character is.
Finally, although a subjective element marks a sentence as subjective (cf. Section 42), not all subjective sentences contain subjective elements, and subjective elements do not in general indicate who the subjective character is.
However, subjective sentences that are not marked as such, or that do not indicate who the subjective character is, usually appear in the midst of other subjective sentences attributed to the same subjective character.
That is, once a clearly marked subjective sentence appears for which the subjective character can be determined, unmarked subjective sentences attributed to the same subjective character often follow.
Thus, to recognize subjective sentences in general, we need to consider subjectivity at the level of the discourse.
For this reason, we extend the notions of subjective and objective sentences to the notions of subjective and objective contexts, which consist of one or more subjective sentences attributed to the same subjective character, or one or more objective sentences, respectively.
Our algorithm for recognizing the current perspective is a discourse process that looks for the boundaries of subjective contexts.
During narrative understanding, it maintains a stack, called the current perspective (CP).
At the beginning of a narrative, the CP is initialized to be the reader.
When a new subjective context is recognized, its subjective character is pushed onto the CP.
When the end of a subjective context is recognized, a character is popped from the CP.
More precisely, since SNePS (Shapiro 1979), our knowledge representation system, is fully intensional, only the reader's concepts of the characters are represented (Maida and Shapiro 1982, Shapiro and Rapaport 1987).
So, it is actually the reader's concepts of the characters that are pushed onto the CP.
4. RECOGNIZING SUBJECTIVE CONTEXTS.
To recognize subjective contexts, our discourse process relies exclusively on linguistic signals of subjective contexts.
In this, it is incomplete: If a subjective context appears in which these linguistic signals are not present, then the subjective context is not recognized.
4.1.
Psychological Verbs, Actions, Adjectives, and Perceptual Verbs.
Reports involving psychological verbs (e.g., 'think', 'wonder', 'realize', 'want', 'remember') or .perceptual verbs (e.g..
'see', 'hear') signal that a subjective context will follow.
So do predicate-adjective sentences with psychological adjectives (e.g., 'delighted', 'happy', 'jealous', 'scared') (cf. Banfield (1982), Cohn (1978), Doleiel (1973)).
In addition, we have identified what we call psychological actions—e.g., &quot;he smiled to himself&quot;, &quot;she gasped&quot;, &quot;she winced&quot;—which function in the same way as psychological verbs.
A sentence of one of these types is a typical way of establishing a subjective context.
Examples (1) and (2), above, and (3), below, exhibit this pattern: (3) 'She [Hannah] winced as she heard them crash to the platform.
&quot;The lovely little mirror that she had brought for Ellen, and the gifts for the baby!
[Franchere, Hannah HerseV, p.3] In each example, the first sentence is a psychological or perceptual report, and the second is a represented thought or represented perception, respectively; the subjective character of the second sentence is taken to be the subject of the first.
In our discourse process, the subject of a perceptual or psychological report, or of a predicate-adjective sentence with a psychological adjective, is pushed onto the CP if a character isn't already on the top of it.
If a character is already on the top of the CP, then no change is made, and the sentence is understood to be part of the already established subjective context.
4.2.
Subjective Elements.
Many subjective elements mark a sentence in third-person narrative as subjective because they are expressive in nature.
Some that Banfield identifies are exclamations, which express emotion; questions, which express wonder, epithets, such as 'the bastard', which express some qualification of the referent; and certain kinship terms, e.g., 'Daddy', 'Mom', and 'Aunt Margaret', which express a relationship to the referent She also identifies evaluative adjectives, which express an attitude toward the referent, e.g., 'ghastly', 'surprising', 'poor', and 'damned', although some evaluative adjectives, such as 'poor' and 'damned', have their evaluative meanings only when they occur in certain parts of the sentence.
Intensifiers such as 'too', 'quite', and `so' are also evaluative (Banfield 1982), as in: for Aunt Margaret's sake.
5&quot;After all, Aunt Margaret had troubles of her own—she was the mother of that ghastly Dill.
[Gage, Miss Osborne-the-Mop, pp. 16-17] Modal verbs of obligation, possibility, and necessity are also expressive.
For example, 'should', in (53), is a modal verb of obligation.
So are many content (or attitudinal) disjuncts, which comment on the content of the utterance (Quirk et al. 1985).
For example, 'likely'.
'maybe', 'probably', and 'perhaps' express some degree of doubt: (6) Something jingled—car keys probably.
[Oneal, War Work, p. 132] Conjuncts, which comment on the connection between items (Quirk et al. 1985), can also be expressive.
For example, 'anyhow', 'anyway', 'still', and 'after all' express concession (Quirk et al. 1985).
An example is 'After all' in (5.4).
Other subjective elements are sentence fragments (Banfield 1982), such as (7.2), (7) &quot;His brain worked slowly through what he knew about this person.
&quot;David's kid.
[Bridgers, All Together Now, p. 91] and the uses of 'this', 'that', 'these', and 'those' that Robin Lakoff (1974) has identified as emotional deixis.
In conversation, they are &quot;generally linked to the speaker's emotional involvement in the subject-matter of his utterance&quot; (Lakoff 1974: 347); in third-person narrative, they are linked to the subjective character's emotional involvement in the subject matter of his thoughts or perceptions.
Examples are 'this' in (8.1) and &quot;That' in (9.2): (9) &quot;As she watched, a wave of jealousy spread through her.
&quot;That insufferable stranger who had passed them on the road was receiving the welcome that she had been dreaming of all the way from Connecticut.
[Franchere, Hannah Herself, p. 15] In speech, the emotion, evaluation, etc., expressed by a subjective element is always attributed to the speaker in third-person narrative, it is attributed to a character.'
Clearly, many types of language-understanding abilities are needed to understand the range of subjective elements.
Our purpose here is to show how our discourse process uses them as markers of subjective contexts, and how it determines the subjective character whose thoughts or perceptions they mark.
However, recognizing the subjective character is always required before a subjective element can be understood.
When a subjective element is encountered in the narrative, our discourse process updates the CP according to the following algorithm: (Al) If there is currently a character on the CP, 'then do not change the CP else if there is an actor focus at the start of the current sentence who is a character in the scene 2then push him or her onto the CP 3else create a new and indeterminate concept and push it onto the CP.
4.2.1.
Discussion of branch 1.
Branch 1 is taken when a subjective element continues the current subjective context.
For example, the exclamation in (3.2), which is a subjective element, continues the subjective context established by (3.1).
The subjective elements 'should' and 'really' in (5.3) and 'After all', 'Aunt Margaret', 'that', and 'ghastly' in (5.4) continue the subjective context established in (5.1).
4.2.2.
Discussion of branch 2.
The actor focus used in branch 2 is one of the foci that need to be maintained for the comprehension of definite anaphora (Sidner 1983).
It is whoever is the agent of the current sentence.
(Note that quoted speech has its own foci, which must be maintained separately.
In this sense, quoted speech constitutes a separate discourse segment (cf. Grosz and Sidner (1986).)
Consider the following example: (10) &quot;11In the kitchen she [Jody] set the basket down on the table.
1°2She put the thermos and the cups in the sink and filled them with cool water to soak.
1°3Then In sane third-person novels, panic:Wady in the 19th century, an overt narrator (Chum= 1978) uses subjective elements.
We do not consider novels with overt narrators.
she tiptoed upstairs to her room.
'&quot;Perhaps Aunt Margaret was taking a nap.
1°2It wouldn't do to disturb her.
[Gage, Miss Osborne-the-Mop, p. 25] Since Jody is the actor focus at the beginning of (10.4) (she is the actor focus of (10.1)-(10.3)), and she is a character in the scene, the subjective element 'Perhaps' is attributed to her when it is encountered, and she is pushed onto the CP.
Sidner (1983) has shown that, in anaphora comprehension, the current actor or discourse focus can be rejected as the co-specifier of an anaphor on the basis of pragmatic factors.
Similarly, the actor focus may be rejected as the subjective character to whom the subjective element is attributed, in favor of another character in the scene.
The pragmatic factors involved appear to be which characters have been subjective characters in the past and whose thoughts or perceptions the sentence containing the subjective element is likely to be reflecting.
Consider the following example, in which Adnarel, a seraph, has just appeared before Lemech and Sandy: (11) &quot;'Lemech greeted him [Adnarel] respectfully.
&quot;Adnarel we thank you.&quot; 1121'hen he said to Sandy, &quot;The seraph will be able to help you.
Seraphim know much about healing.&quot; &quot;So this was a seraph.
[L'Engle, Many Waters, p. 39] Lemech is the actor focus of (11.1) and (112).
However, it would be clear to someone who had read the novel up to this point that (11.3) is Sandy's thought.
First, Sandy is a visitor to a strange world, of which Lemech is an inhabitant; so it is Sandy, not Lemech, who is likely not to have lmown what a seraph is.
Second, prior to this passage, subjective contexts have been attributed to Sandy, but not to Lemech.
We are investigating the reasoning required by the reader in rejecting the current actor in favor of another character.
4.23.
Discussion of branch 3.
Branch 3 is taken when the reader cannot identify the subjective character and must read further in the text in order to do so.
In this case, an indeterminate, intensional concept is pushed onto the CP.
When the reader finally identifies the subjective character, the information that this character and the indeterminate one are co-extensional is built (that is, it is asserted that they are concepts of the same individual; cf. Maida and Shapiro (1982), Shapiro and Rapaport (1987)).
Naicong Li (1986) uses this approach in her pronoun resolution algorithm if the information needed to resolve a pronoun is supplied after the pronoun is encountered.
Often, the subjective character is identified by a narrative parenthetical, as in the following example: Sentence (12.1) begins with a question, which is a subjective element.
It occurs just after a shift in scene, so it does not continue a current subjective context, and there is no actor focus.
When 'What' is encountered in (12.1), branch 3 pushes a new concept onto the CP: At this point, the reader has recognized someone's thought, but does not yet know whose.
When the reader encounters the parenthetical, she identifies the subjective character as the colonel, and builds a proposition that the colonel and the new concept are co-extensional (that is, she comes to believe that the question was the colonel's thought).
4.2.4.
Comparison of evaluative and psychological adjectives.
Before leaving our discussion of subjective elements, it will be useful to contrast the ways that predicate-adjective sentences with psychological and with evaluative adjectives are treated by our discourse process.
Compare the following sentences: Sentence (A) contains the psychological adjective 'delighted', and (B) contains the evaluative adjective 'ghastly'.
In (A) (assuming no previous subjective context), Jody is pushed onto the CP, and (A) establishes a subjective context attributed to Jody.
In (B), algorithm (Al) determines whose attitude toward Jody is being expressed, and it does not choose the subject of the sentence.
Thus, psychological adjectives can establish the perspective of the subject, whereas evaluative adjectives express an attitude toward the subject.