<newSection> INTRODUCTION In this paper, I present work in progress on an extension of Combinatory Categorial Grammars, CCGs, (Steedman 1985) to handle languages with freer word order than English, specifically Turkish.
The approach I develop takes advantage of CCGs' ability to combine the syntactic as well as the semantic representations of adjacent elements in a sentence in an incremental manner.
The linguistic claim behind my approach is that free word order in Turkish is a direct result of its grammar and lexical categories; this approach is not compatible with a linguistic theory involving movement operations and traces.
A rich system of case markings identifies the predicate-argument structure of a Turkish sentence, while the word order serves a pragmatic function.
The pragmatic functions of certain positions in the sentence roughly consist of a sentence-initial position for the topic, an immediately pre-verbal position for the focus, and post-verbal positions for backgrounded information (Erguvanli 1984).
The most common word order in simple transitive sentences is SOV (Subject-Object-Verb).
However, all of the permutations of the sentence seen below are grammatical in the proper discourse situations.
Elements with overt case marking generally can scramble freely, even out of embedded clauses.
This suggest a CCG approach where case-marked elements are functions which can combine with one another and with verbs in any order.
*I thank Young-Suk Lee, Michael Niv, Jong Park, Mark Steedman, and Michael White for their valuable advice.
This work was partially supported by ARO DAAL03-89-C-0031, DARPA N00014-904-1863, NSF IRI 90-16592, Ben Franklin 91S.3078C-1.
Karttunen (1986) has proposed a Categorial Grammar formalism to handle free word order in Finnish, in which noun phrases are functors that apply to the verbal basic elements.
Our approach treats case-marked noun phrases as functors as well; however, we allow verbs to maintain their status as functors in order to handle object-incorporation and the combining of nested verbs.
In addition, CCGs, unlike Karttunen's grammar, allow the operations of composition and type raising which have been useful in handling a variety of linguistic phenomena including long distance dependencies and nonconstituent coordination (Steedman 1985) and will play an essential role in this analysis.