<newSection> 4 SENSEVAh and Machine Translation evaluation As noted above, overall SENSEVAI, design is taken from MUC.
We have also followed MUC and TREC discussions of the hub-and-spokes model and the need to forever look towards updating the task, to guard against participants becoming expert at the task as defined but not at anything else.
WSD is not a task of interest in itself.
One does WSD in order to improve performance on some other task.
The critical end-to-end task, for WSD, is Machine Translation (Kilgarriff, 1997).
In SENSEVAI,-2, for Japanese there was a translation memory task, which took the form of an MT evaluation (Kurohashi, 2001).
In that experimental design, each system response potentially requires individual attention from a human assessor.
As in assessing human or computer translation, one cannot specify a complete set of correct answers ahead of time, so one must be open to the possibility that the system response is correct but different from all the responses seen to date.
Thus the exercise is potentially far more expensive than the MUC model.
In the MUC model, human attention is required for each data instance.
In this model, human attention is potentially required for each data-instance/system combination.
Another consequence is that there is no freestanding, system-independent gold standard corpus of correct answers.
New or revised systems cannot simply test against a gold standard (unless they limit their range of possible answers to ones already encountered, which would introduce further biases).
So it is a more complex and costly form of evaluation.
However it is also far more closely related to a real task.
It is a direction that SENSEVAI, needs to take.2 The MUC-style fixed-sense-inventory should be seen as what was necessary to open the chapter on WSD evaluation: a graspable, manageable task when we had no experience of the difficulties we might encounter, which also provided researchers with some objective datasets for their development work.
For the future the emphasis needs to be on assessments such as the Japanese one, related to real tasks.