<newSection> Abstract This discussion document concerns the challenges to assessments of reliability posed by wikis and the potential for language processing techniques for aiding readers to decide whether to trust particular text.
1 Wikis and the trust problem Wikis, especially open wikis, pose new challenges for readers in deciding whether information is trustworthy.
An article in a wikipedia may be generally well-written and appear authoritative, so that the reader is inclined to trust it, but have some additions by other authors which are incorrect.
Corrections may eventually get made, but there will be a time lag.
In particular, many people are now using Wikipedia (www.wikipedia.org) as a major reference source, so the potential for misinformation to be spread is increasing.
It has already become apparent that articles about politicians are being edited by their staff to make them more favourable and no doubt various interest groups are manipulating information in more subtle ways.
In fact, as wikis develop, problems with reliability may get worse: authors who wrote an article several years ago won’t care so much about its content and may not bother to check edits.
When obscure topics are covered by a wiki, the community which is capable of checking facts may be small.
Of course errors arise in old text too, but a generally authoritative conventional article is unlikely to contain a really major error about a central topic.
Different old text publications have different perspectives, political or otherwise, but the overall slant is usually generally known and hence not problematic.
Non-wiki web pages may have unknown authors, but the domain offers some guide to reliability and to likely skew and the pages can be assessed as a whole.
The issue here is not the overall number of errors in wikis versus published text or web pages, but how a reader can decide to trust a particular piece of information when they cannot use the article as a whole as a guide.
There is a need for automatic tools which could provide an aid for the reader who needs to assess trustworthiness and also for authors and moderators scanning changes.
Similarly, moderators need tools for identification of vandalism, libel, advertising and so on.
Questions: