<newSection> About ICoS Natural Language Processing has reached a stage where the exploration and development of inference is one of its most pressing tasks.
On the theoretical side, it is clear that inference plays a key role in such areas as semantic construction and the management of discourse and dialogue.
On the practical side, the use of sophisticated inference methods is expected to play a crucial role in such application areas as natural language generation, automatic question answering, and spoken dialogue systems.
At the same time, inference tools and resources have matured to the point that they can become useful for actual applications.
Automated theorem provers and other inference tools are becoming increasingly robust and efficient.
And the world knowledge bottleneck is being addressed from different angles, by the manual development of knowledge resources, the merging of existing such resources, and the automated extraction of world knowledge from corpora.
The Inference in Computational Semantics (ICoS) workshops are intended to bring together researchers from areas such as Computational Linguistics, Artificial Intelligence, Computer Science, Formal Semantics, and Logic, to discuss approaches to, and applications of, inference in natural language semantics.
ICoS-1 took place in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, on August 15, 1999.
ICoS-2 was organised in Dagstuhl Castle, Germany, on July 29–30, 2000.
ICoS-3 was co-located with the International Joint Conference on Automated Reasoning (IJCAR 2001), which took place on June 18–23, 2001 at Siena, Italy.
ICoS-4 took place in Nancy, France, on September 25–26, 2003.
Welcome to ICoS-5 ICoS-5 is organised as a two-day event at the University of Derby College, Buxton, England, taking place on April 20–21.
The programme features three invited presentations (by Christian Ebert, Patrick Pantel, and Stephen Pulman).
In addition, we have selected twelve regular papers from 24 submissions, which span topics ranging from the use of inference techniques for formal and computational semantics, over new methods for knowledge extraction from corpora, to NLP applications that use inference tools.
We have accepted six of the remaining submissions as “short papers”.
These papers will be presented as posters and demos at the workshop, and we believe that this new format will be a worthwhile experience both for authors and for participants.
We would like to thank the members of the programme committee, who produced highly informative reviews and made it possible to set up the broad and strong program for ICoS-5.
Finally, we are very grateful to the local organisers, Ian Pratt-Hartmann and Allan Ramsay, who did a flawless job of preparing what promises to be a wonderful workshop location for us.