<newSection> 1 Introduction Central to the vision of the Semantic Grid is the adoption of metadata and ontologies to describe resources, to promote and enhance collaboration (De Roure et al., 2005).
This raises the question of how such metadata comes into existence.
Ideally the users should create it themselves, which raises the issue of how a scientist should create RDF.
In our work in the area of e-social science1, we aim to support social scientists in their research, using (Semantic) Grid technologies.
For this, a tool is needed that facilitates easy creation of RDF by non-experts, to enable researchers to deposit and describe their own data.
We believe that, for social scientists, natural language is the best medium to use, as the way they conduct their research and the structure of their documents and data indicate that they are more oriented towards text than graphics.
We originally envisaged such tools as being driven by an underlying ontology.
However, from the start users expressed a fear of ‘being trapped in the ontology’, due to the contested nature of many social science concepts (Edwards et al., 2006).
We therefore aim to maximise the users’ freedom, keeping the tools open-ended by supporting dynamic evolution of metadata and integrating ontologies with folksonomies (Guy and Tonkin, 2006).
A folksonomy is a social classification process where users can annotate their resources with keywords or tags, which are not restricted in any way.
In some folksonomies, e.g. Flickr2, users can use other users’ tags, so that a set of frequent tags emerges.
Using a folksonomy, we could suggest feasible tags to influence user-behaviour, without restricting the user to a pre-defined set of concepts.
Natural language applications are often domain specific and not very flexible.
This makes the open-endedness we need a great challenge.
Existing elicitation approaches, such as using Controlled Languages, restrict in great measure what the user can and cannot say.
We believe that to achieve the desired open-endedness and flexibility, the best approach is not based on natural language processing, as it is as yet beyond the state of the art to reliably parse all user utterances, but based on natural language generation.
In WYSIWYM (Power et al., 1998), the user can specify information by editing a feedback text that is generated by the system, based on a semantic representation of the information that the user has specified already.
This NLG-approach, we believe, can give us both the flexibility we need and fluent language output.
The expressivity of the language need not be restricted as it is generated by the system, and does not need to be parsed; and if we enable the user to modify the underlying data structure while using the tool, we have the desired open-endedness.
Figure 1 shows a feedback text (generated by the current system) for a scenario in which a social scientist is depositing data that forms part of a study into rural accessibility.
Existing options for depositing such data (e.g. the UK Data Archive3) are found to be too restrictive by some social scientists.
We therefore think there is scope for a tool that allows scientists to describe their data themselves, in a way they see fit.
In the next sections we will first describe some related work in NLG and the Semantic Grid community, then describe the design and implementation of our metadata-elicitation tool.
We will discuss possible methods for keeping the tool open-ended and unrestrictive, and how folksonomies may be a part of the solution, and conclude with a description of remaining issues and plans for the future.