<newSection> Abstract This paper presents the evaluation of a subset of the capabilities of the OntoSem semantic analyzer conducted in the framework of the Shared Task for the STEP 2008 workshop.
We very briefly describe OntoSem’s components and knowledge resources, describe the work preparatory to the evaluation (the creation of gold standard basic text meaning representations) and present OntoSem’s performance on word sense disambiguation and determination of semantic dependencies.
The paper also contains elements of a methodological discussion.
OntoSem, which is the implementation of the theory of Ontological Semantics (Nirenburg and Raskin, 2004), is a text-processing environment that takes as input unrestricted raw text and carries out preprocessing followed by morphological, syntactic, semantic, and discourse analysis, with the results of analysis represented as a formal text-meaning representation (TMR) that can then be used as the basis for various applications.
Text analysis relies on several knowledge resources, briefly described in the subsections below.
The OntoSem ontology is a formal, language-independent, unambiguous model of the world that provides a metalanguage for describing meaning.
It is a multiple-inheritance hierarchical collection of frames that contains richly interconnected descriptions of types of OBJECTs, EVENTs and PROPERTies.
It is a general purposes ontology, containing about 9,000 concepts, that has a number of especially well developed domains that reflect past and ongoing application-specific knowledge acquisition.
Each OBJECT and EVENT is described by several dozen properties, some property values being locally specified and others, inherited from ancestors.
Selectional restrictions in the ontology are multivalued, with fillers being introduced by a facet.
The value facet is rigid and is used less in the ontology than in its sister knowledge base of real-world assertions, the fact repository (see Section 1.3).
The facets default (for strongly preferred constraints) and sem (for basic semantic constraints) are abductively overridable.
The relaxable-to facet indicates possible but atypical restrictions, and not blocks the given type of filler.
Event-oriented scripts encode typical sequences of EVENTs and the OBJECTs that fill their case-roles.
Scripts are used to reason about both language and the world and, in addition to supporting text processing, can support simulation, as in our ongoing Maryland Virtual Patient project (see, e.g. McShane et al., 2007).
The number of concepts in the ontology is far fewer than the number of words or phrases in any language due to the existence of synonyms in language; the possibility of describing lexical items using a combination of ontological and extra-ontological (e.g., temporal) descriptors; the use of a single concept for each scalar attribute that describes all words on that scale (e.g., gorgeous, pretty, ugly); and the decision not to include language-specific concepts in the ontology.
As an example of the description of an ontological concept, consider an excerpt from the description of the concept ESOPHAGUS: