<newSection> Introduction We are happy to present the Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2009 Conference, the 10th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue.
This year the SIGDIAL meeting has been elevated from Workshop to Conference by ACL, its main sponsoring organization.
That is an unmistakable recognition of the role that dialogue and discourse research play in the fields of computational linguistics, human-machine communication, and language technology in general.
Our thanks go to the program committee who have performed an excellent job in reviewing the submitted papers and providing scores and comments that have helped to maintain a high standard of quality.
We received a record number of 103 submissions; 24 of them were accepted as lectures, 24 as poster presentations, and 3 as demos.
As it is a tradition of SIGDIAL, we have attempted to preserve a balance among the different topics, especially between the more theoretical and empirically oriented studies and the technological and engineering challenges.
We are also grateful to our two keynote speakers: Professor Yorick Wilks and Professor Janet Bavelas for providing stimulating talks on the state-of-the-art in dialogue research.
Many thanks go to Donna Byron and Steve Young who graciously agreed to serve as technical program chairs and coordinated the whole review process by selecting the program committee, assigning papers to reviewers, resolving conflicts, and making sure that all reviews were submitted on time.
They also selected the candidates for the best paper awards, and created the final program of the conference.
Many thanks to Matthew Purver, local Chair, who has done an outstanding job; always available and ready to help at any step of the process, from the local arrangements, to the conference Web site, to the publication of these proceedings.
We are grateful to ACL and Priscilla Rasmussen for providing financial support and budgetary information, and the SIGDIAL board for their constant support in all matters, in particular Tim Paek, SIGDIAL President, Amanda Stent, David Traum, and Kristiina Jokinen.
And finally, thanks to all the authors that submitted the papers and all the participants to the meeting for their continuous support of this exciting and interesting conference.
Pat Healey & Roberto Pieraccini SIGDIAL 2009 Co-Chairs iii