<newSection> 1 Introduction Integer linear programming (ILP) is a framework for solving combinatorial problems with linear constraints of the form y = c1x1 + c2x2 + ...
+ cnxn where the variables (ie., y and xis) take on only integer values.
ILP is a special case of a larger family of contraint-based solving techniques in which variables may take on additional types of values (eg. discrete, symbolic, real, set, and structured) or involve additional kinds of constraints (eg. logical and non-linear, such as x ∧ y ⇒ z and y = cxn).
Constraint-based problem solving approaches offer a more natural way of modeling many kinds of real-world problems.
Furthermore, the declarative nature of constraint-based approaches makes them versatile since the order in which the variables are solved is not predetermined.
The same program can thus be reused for solving different subsets of the problem’s variables.
Additionally, in some cases, constraint-based approaches can solve problems more efficiently or accurately than alternative approaches.
Constraint Programming (CP) is a field of research that develops algorithms and tools for constraint-based problem solving.
This abstract describes work-in-progress on a project to develop a CP-based general-purpose broad-coverage probabilistic syntactic language processing system for English.
Because of its declarative nature, the system can be used for both parsing and realization as well as their subtasks (such as tagging, chunk parsing, lexical choice, or word ordering) or hybridiza-tions (like text-to-text generation).
We expect this tool to be useful for a wide range of applications from information extraction to machine translation to human-computer dialog.
An ambitious project such as this poses a number of questions and difficult challenges, including: a) how to declaratively represent the syntactic structure of sentences, b) how to integrate the processing of hard constraints with soft (probabilistic) ones, c) how to overcome problems of intractibility associated with large problems and rich representations in learning, inference, as well as search.