<newSection> 2 Combining character-based and subsequence-based tagging for Chinese word segmentation In character-based tagging approach to Chinese word segmentation, it tags the word-position of non-Chinese characters, such as punctuation, letter words and numeric, just like what to do with Chinese characters.
This method works well when there is a small quantity of these characters.
But plenty of these characters will cut down the segmentation performance, especially some abbreviation and programming statement in computer science domain.
Considering this, we used a method combining character-based and subsequence-based tagging that is to take an English word or programming statement as a subsequence to tag its word-position.
The correct tag for one-character word is S.
M(Middle of word), E(End of word) and S(onecharacter word).
To define the relationship of some specific language components or information in context and some being forecasted things is the main function of feature template.
It is generally considered that feature template is abstracted from a group of context features on same attributes.
In CRF++0.53 toolkit, there are two kind of templates: Unigram template and Bigram template.
In word-position tagging Chinese segmentation, available features are rather limited.
The main feature needed to take into account is character feature, which includes current character, previous and next character.
Jiang, Wang and Guan (2007) abstracted the character features into six templates according different distances from current character.
They are Unigram templates.
The type and meaning of these templates are presented in table 1.
When training with CRFs model, these templates will be extended to thousands of features and every feature has a group of corresponding feature functions.
All these functions are very important to CRFs model learning.
Seen from table 1, Bigram feature has only one template: T-1T0 which describes the word-position transfer feature of two adjacent characters or subsequences.
This feature extends limited features in training.
Take four-WORD-POSITION-tag for instance, it can be extended into sixteen features.
In our tracks, open or closed one, the seven templates in table 1: C-1, C0, C1, C-1C0, C0C1, C-1C1, T-1T0 are used.
Type of template Unigram In the closed track of traditional Chinese and simplified Chinese, four word-position tag set is used: B (Beginning of word), M(Middle of word), E(End of word) and S(one-character word).
The tag set is also used in open tracks of traditional Chinese.
And we used six word-position tag set for open tracks of simplified Chinese: B(Beginning of word), B2(2nd character of word), B3(3rd character of word)