<newSection> Introduction Recent years have shown an increased amount of interest in applying graph theoretic models to computational linguistics.
Both graph theory and computational linguistics are well studied disciplines, which have traditionally been perceived as distinct, embracing different algorithms, different applications, and different potential end-users.
However, as recent research work has shown, the two seemingly distinct disciplines are in fact intimately connected, with a large variety of Natural Language Processing (NLP) applications adopting efficient and elegant solutions from graph-theoretical framework.
The TextGraphs workshop series addresses a broad spectrum of research areas and brings together specialists working on graph-based models and algorithms for natural language processing and computational linguistics, as well as on the theoretical foundations of related graph-based methods.
This workshop is aimed at fostering an exchange of ideas by facilitating a discussion about both the techniques and the theoretical justification of the empirical results among the NLP community members.
Spawning a deeper understanding of the basic theoretical principles involved, such interaction is vital to the further progress of graph-based NLP applications.
In addition to the general goal of employing graph-theoretical methods for text processing tasks, this year we invited papers on a special theme “Graph Methods for Opinion analysis”.
One of the motivations for our special theme was that graphical approaches become very pertinent as the field of opinion mining advances towards deeper analysis and more complex systems.
We wanted to encourage publication of early results, position papers and initiate discussions of issues in this area.
This volume contains papers accepted for publication for TextGraphs-5 2010 Workshop on Graph- Based Algorithms for Natural Language Processing.
TextGraphs-5 was held on 16th of July 2010 in Uppsala, Sweden at ACL 2010, the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
This was the fifth workshop in this series, building on the successes of previous workshops that were held at HLT-NAACL (2006, 2007), Coling (2008) and ACL (2009).
We issued calls for both regular, short and position papers.
Six regular and ten short papers were accepted for presentation, based on the careful reviews of our program committee.
We are very thankful to the incredible program committee, whose detailed comments and useful suggestions have benefited the papers and helped us to create a great program.
We are particularly grateful for the timely reviews, especially considering that we had a tight schedule.
The articles apply graph methods to a variety of NLP problems such as Word Sense Disambiguation (De Cao et al., Fagerlund et al., Biemannl), Topic Segmentation (Ambwani and Davis), Summarization (Jorge and Pardo, Fukumoto and Suzuki), Language Evolution (Enright), Language Acquisition (German et al.), Language Resources (Archer), Lexical Networks (Oliveira and Gomes, Gornerup and Karlgren) and Clustering (Wieling and Nerbonne, Chen and Ji).
Additionally, we have selected three papers for our special theme: Zontone et al. use graph theoretic dominant set clustering algorithm for the annotation of images with sentiment scores, Amancio et al. employ complex network features to distinguish between positive and negative opinions, and Tatzl and Waldhauser offer a formalization that could help to automate opinion extraction within the Media Content Analysis framework.
Last but not the least, having a prominent researcher as the invited speaker significantly added to the success of our workshop.
We would like to thank Professor Edwin Hancock from the iii University of York for his captivating talk on graph-based machine learning algorithms.
We are also grateful to the European Community project, EternalS: “Trustworthy Eternal Systems via Evolving Software, Data and Knowledge” (project number FP7 247758) for sponsoring our invited speaker.
Enjoy the workshop!
The organizers Carmen Banea, Alessandro Moschitti, Swapna Somasundaran and Fabio Massimo Zanzotto Upsala, July 2010 iv Organizers: