<newSection> Abstract We consider sentences of the form No X is too Y to Z, in which X is a noun phrase, Y is an adjective phrase, and Z is a verb phrase.
Such constructions are ambiguous, with two possible (and opposite!) interpretations, roughly meaning either that “Every X Zs”, or that “No X Zs”.
The interpretations have been noted to depend on semantic and pragmatic factors.
We show here that automatic disambiguation of this pragmatically complex construction can be largely achieved by using features of the lexical semantic properties of the verb (i.e., Z) participating in the construction.
We discuss our experimental findings in the context of construction grammar, which suggests a possible account of this phenomenon.
1 No noun is too adjective to verb Consider the following two sentences: Each of these sentences has the form of No Xis too Y to Z, where X, Y, and Z are a noun phrase, adjective phrase, and verb phrase, respectively.
Sentence (1) is generally taken to mean that every interest deserves its own newsletter, regardless of how narrow it is.
On the other hand, (2) is typically interpreted as meaning that no item escapes his attention, regardless of how minor it is.
That is, sentences with the identical form of No X is too Y to Z either can mean that “every X Zs”, or can mean the opposite—that “no X Zs”!1 This “verbal illusion” (Wason and Reich, 1979), so-called because there are two opposite interpretations for the very same structure, is of interest to us for two reasons.
First, the contradictory nature of the possible meanings has been explained in terms of pragmatic factors concerning the relevant presuppositions of the sentences.
According to Wason and Reich (1979) (as explained in more detail below), sentences such as (2) are actually nonsensical, but people coerce them into a sensible reading by reversing the interpretation.
One of our goals in this work is to explore whether computational linguistic techniques—specifically automatic corpus analysis drawing on lexical resources—can help to elucidate the factors influencing interpretation of such sentences across a collection of actual usages.
The second reason for our interest in this construction is that it illustrates a complex ambiguity that can cause difficulty for natural language processing applications that seek to semantically interpret text.
Faced with the above two sentences, a parsing system (in the absence of specific knowledge of this construction) will presumably find the exact same structure for each, giving no basis on which to determine the correct meaning from the parse.
(Unsurprisingly, when we run the C&C Parser (Curran et al., 2007) on (1) and (2) it assigns the same structure to each sentence.)
Our second goal in this work is thus to explore whether increased linguistic understanding of this phenomenon could be used to disambiguate such examples automatically.
Specifically, we use this construction as an example of the kind of difficulties faced in semantic interpretation when meaning may be determined by pragmatic or other extra-syntactic factors, in order to explore whether lexical semantic features can be used as cues to resolving pragmatic ambiguity when a complex semantico-pragmatic model is not feasible.
In the remainder of this paper, we present the first computational study of the No X is too Y to Z phenomenon, which attempts to automatically determine the meaning of instances of this semantically and pragmatically complex construction.
In Section 2 we present previous analyses of this construction, and our hypothesis.
In Section 3, we describe the creation of a dataset of instances that verifies that both interpretations (“every” and “no”) indeed occur in corpora.
We then analyze the human annotations in this dataset in more detail in Section 4.
In Section 5, we present the feature model we use to describe the instances, which taps into the lexical semantics and polarity of the constituents.
In Section 6, we describe machine learning experiments and classification results that support our hypothesis that the interpretation of this construction largely depends on the semantics of its component verb.
In Section 7 we suggest that our results support an analysis of this phenomenon within construction grammar, and point to some future directions in our research in Section 8. 2 Background and our proposal The No X is too Y to Z construction was investigated by Wason and Reich (1979), and discussed more recently by Pullum (2004) and Liberman (2009a,b).
Here we highlight some of the most important properties of this complex phenomenon.
Our presentation owes much to the lucid discussion and clarification of this topic, and of the work of Wason and Reich specifically, by Liberman.
Wason and Reich argue that the compositional interpretation of sentences of the form of (1) and (2) is “every X Zs”.
Intuitively, this can be understood by considering a sentence identical to sentence (1), but without a negative subject: This interest is too narrow to deserve its own newsletter, which means that “this interest is so narrow that it does not deserve a newsletter”.
This example indicates that the meaning of too narrow to deserve its own newsletter is “so narrow that it does not deserve a newsletter”.
When this negative “too” assertion is compositionally combined with the No interest subject of sentence (1), it results in a meaning with two negatives: “No interest is so narrow that it does not deserve a newsletter”, or simply, “Every interest deserves a newsletter”.
Wason and Reich note that in sentences such as (1), the compositional “every” interpretation is consistent with common beliefs about the world, and thus refer to such sentences as “pragmatic”.
By contrast, the compositional interpretation of sentences such as (2) does not correspond to our common sense beliefs.
Consider an analogous (non-negative subject) sentence to sentence (2)— i.e., This item is too minor to escape his attention.
It is nonsensical that “This item is so minor that it does not escape his attention”, since being more “minor” entails more likelihood of escaping attention, not less.
The compositional interpretation of (2) is similarly nonsensical—i.e., that “No item is so minor that it does not escape his attention”; Such sentences are thus termed “non-pragmatic” by Wason and Reich, who argue that the complexity of the non-pragmatic sentences—arising in part due to the number of negations they contain— causes the listener or reader to misconstrue them.
According to their reasoning, listeners choose an interpretation that is consistent with their beliefs about the world—namely that “no X Zs”, in this case that “No item escapes his attention”—instead of the compositional interpretation (“Every item escapes his attention”).
While Wason and Reich focus on the compositional semantics and pragmatics of these sentences, they also note that the non-pragmatic examples typically use a verb that itself has some aspect of negation, such as ignore, miss, and overlook.
This property is also pointed out by Pullum (2004), who notes that avoid in his example of the construction means “manage to not do” something.
Building on this observation, we hypothesize that lexical properties of the component constituents of this construction, particularly the verb, can be important cues to its semantico-pragmatic interpretation.
Specifically, we hypothesize that the pragmatic (“every” interpretation) and non-pragmatic (“no” interpretation) sentences will tend to involve verbs with different semantics.
Given that verbs of different semantic classes have different selectional preferences, we also expect to see the “every” and “no” sentences associated with semantically different nouns and adjectives.