<newSection> 1 Current Approaches to Justifying a Set of Relations Clearly, a set of relations must have 'good coverage'—it must be possible to analyse all the texts of the kind targeted using the specified relations.
At the same time, this cannot be the only requirement on a set of relations, because many different sets of relations can be used to describe the same set of texts.
For instance, the level of detail of the description is not constrained: how do we decide whether or not to subdivide RESULT into VOLITIONAL RESULT and NON-VOLITIONAL RESULT?
Again, different cuts through the space of relations are possible: why distinguish between VOLITIONAL and NON-VOLITIONAL result, and not between, say, IMMEDIATE and DELAYED result?
In fact the notion of 'descriptive adequacy' seems to make little sense in isolation: in addition, it is necessary to specify a purpose for which the proposed description is adequate.
One way that a purpose can be specified is by stipulating that relations model 'cognitive' constructs—that is, constructs which people actually use when they create and interpret text.
On this conception, a description of the relations in a text becomes part of a theory of how the text originated, and why it is the way it is.
This stipulation gives relations real explanatory power in a theory of discourse coherence: we could argue that it is because a given set of relations is involved in text processing that we are able to use them to describe text.
Claiming psychological reality for relations makes them amenable to empirical investigation.
Sanders, Spooren and Noordman [3] make the claim explicitly, and seek evidence for their proposed set of relations in psychological experiments on readers and writers.
But these experiments are not without their own problems—it is questionable whether empirical experiment is a sharp enough tool to reveal fine-grained distinctions between relations.
(Automatic text generation is one area where such fine-grained distinctions might well be necessary.)
Cue phrases (sentence connectives such as because and nevertheless) have been another influence on the choice of a set of relations.
Even in RST, where relations are defined without reference to surface linguistic phenomena, many correlations exist between relations and particular cue phrases.
Hovy [I] makes more explicit use of cue phrases, taking them as 'nonconclusive' evidence for a taxonomy of relations.
However, while it is clear that a fine-grained classification of relations could indeed be constructed using cue phrases, the question of why relations should be linked to cue phrases has not been addressed in detail.
Hovy's rationale concerns the practicalities of designing text planning systems; such a pragmatic approach has its advantages, but it would nonetheless be useful to think of a theoretical reason for linking relations to cue phrases.
Without one, relations lack the kind of explanatory power they receive when thought of as psychological constructs.
2 Cue Phrases as Evidence for Cognitive Constructs I have suggested (Knott and Dale [2]) that it is possible to think of cue phrases as evidence for relations precisely if they are conceived as psychological constructs.
The argument is basically that we can expect language to contain ways of making explicit any relations which are actually used by people when they process texts.
If identifying relations is a component of text understanding, then it makes sense for there to be ways of signalling relations directly in text: it facilitates the tasks of both the reader and the writer.
Of course it is often possible for a reader to identify a relation without the need for textual signals.
But it seems unlikely that any relation exists that never needs to be textually marked.
Unmarked relations can only be recognised if the reader has a certain amount of background knowledge about a text; and this knowledge can hardly be guaranteed in advance for all texts in which the relation can appear.
If relations do play a part in human text comprehension, it is reasonable to suggest that there exists a particular linguistic formula cr expression which can be used to distinguish each relation from all others.
This claim, if accepted, would allow a taxonomy of relations to be built which has both fine-grained detail and explanatory power.
The explanatory power comes from the conception of relations as psychological entities: this conception in turn legitimises the use of cue phrases as evidence for relations, allowing a detailed taxonomy to be constructed.