<newSection> Introduction Instructional texts are designed by an Originator (0) to enable a User (U) to perform a task safely, efficiently, and correctly.
The starting point for the construction of such a text is a. set of underlying intentions relating to the actions that U is intended to perform.
This needs to be expressed in the text in a grammatical and pragmatically effective way.
Analysis of multilingual texts, however, indicates that what is pragmatically effective in one language may not be what is preferred in another.
Our research has concentrated on the task of delineating which parts of the text production process are open to this sort of variation, and which parts follow directly from the task structure that is the shared representation for all the languages.
The multilingual data, has enabled its to tease out six levels of representation a.t which variability can and does arise.
This makes the picture, for instruction generation at, least, rather more complex than any simple mapping between task structure and discourse structure can hope to approximate.
What are the levels it is useful to distinguish?
We suggest they are as follows: The knowledge of the artefact A functional model of the artefact and its mode of operation in terms of actions and states; The deep intentions The represention of the originator's intention that the user perform the sequence of actions that constitute a. particular task involving the artefact; The knowledge selected for communication What is to be communicated about the artefact and the task that will enable the users to perform the appropriate actions, based on assumptions about their cultural background, world knowledge, and expertise; The shallow intentions A representation of the goals that the text has to achieve in order to motivate the required tasks; The rhetorical structure The discourse strategy/ies chosen to achieve the text's goals; and The syntactic structure The syntax expressing the chosen rhetorical structure.
We focus here on three of the above levels: deep intentions, shallow intentions and rhetorical structure, and we will present evidence from multilingual instructions that supports this differentiation of levels of description by highlighting the variability that exists between them.
It is clear that, whatever the principles are for relating them, the mapping from one level to another is not a simple one-to-one correspondence.
But why suggest two levels of intentions, and what are they like?
Every set of instructions is the realisation of a programme of actions that the user is required to perform: the deep intentions of the originator.
In multilingual document generation, this programme is necessarily independent of the language(s) in which the instructions are expressed.
Intentions at this level do not specify linguistic acts to be perfornicql; rather, they are intentions for the user to perform concrete actions.
Intentions at this level might therefore be represented as hierarchically- organised sequences of statements like in1.em/8(0 , do( (1, actioni)).
This level of action requirements often does not map directly onto the final text, and may not even be expressed explicitly in it.
It does not correspond to a. text plan; rather, it is the action plan which motivates the text aud as such is but one of several available resources for the text planner.
For example, instructions which include all the actions required to achieve a goal, even those which the user reasonably could be expected to infer, are not usually desirable (see di Eugenio [1992]).
This level of intentions relates almost directly to that presented by Grosz and Sidner [1986:201] in their discussion of what they term the action casc.
The main difference between our deep intentions and those that form Grosz and Sidner's discourse purposes ON and discourse segment puzposes (DsPs) is that we have so far found it sufficient for our purposes to include at this level only the originator's intentions with respect to user actions, and not user beliefs.
In producing instructions the originator also has other intentions, which relate to the way(s) in which he/she will convey the action requirements to the user.
This leads us to propose a second level of intentionality, that of shallow intentions, where the particular functions to be fulfilled by the discourse are specified.
Consider the following simple scenario where the intention of the originator is for the user of an electronic organiser to turn on the machine by pressing the ON button.
The deep intentions would thus be as follows: The intention for the user to turn on the machine is at a. higher level in the intentional structure than the intention for the user to press the button (This might be captured, using Grosz and Sidner's terms, as a DOMINATES relation holding between the higher and lower intentions).
The originator of the instruction may feel that it is sufficient simply to instruct the user to turn cm the machine, or to press the ON button.
This would lead to a shallow intention corresponding to: The choice of final expression (including the choice of coherence relation) will bear a direct relation to choices at the level of shallow intentions, and not deep intention.
In the following multilingual instructions (taken from an instruction manual for a home exercise stepping machine) the deep intention is the same: that the user balance the apparatus by turning the milled wheel.
However, the shallow intentions chosen for the different languages are not the sante: in the English and German versions, the user is told how to balance the apparatus, while the French user is told why the milled wheel needs to be turned.
These differing shallow intentions directly constrain the choice of coherence relation: an analysis in terms of RST, for example, would lead us to assign ENABLEMENT to the German and English versions, but PURPOSE to the French: Note, too, that there is more than one possible surface formulation of each coherence relation: the expression chosen by the originator in each of the above examples is but one of a range of possibilities*.
Moore and Pollack [1992] propose the need for two levels of RST relations, one relating to intentions (e.g. EVIDENCE) and the other to information (e.g. CON DITION ).
Although this suggestion clearly takes its closer to a solution to the lack of delicacy in the characterisation of RST relations, we should be careful to agree on a useful nomenclature that does not itself permit new confusions to arise.
We hope that the workshop will provide an opportunity for clarifying these issues.